13



Tisarwat came to see me just hours before we exited gate-space, into Athoek system. “Sir,” she said, standing just inside the door to my quarters. “I’m on my way to the airlock.”

“Yes.” I stood. A bit steadier on the prosthetic leg than the day before. “Will you have tea?” Five was off on an errand, but there was tea already made, in the flask on the counter.

“No, sir. I’m not sure there’s time. I just wanted…” I waited. Finally she said, “I don’t know what I wanted. No. Wait. I do. If I don’t come back, will you… that other Tisarwat’s family. You won’t tell them what happened to her, will you?”

The chances of my ever having the chance to say anything at all to Tisarwat’s family was so small as to be almost entirely nonexistent. “Of course not.”

She took a long, relieved breath. “Because they don’t deserve that. I know it sounds stupid. I don’t even know them. Except I know so much about them. I just…”

“It’s not stupid. It’s entirely understandable.”

“Is it?” Her arms at her sides, she closed her gloved hands into fists. Unclosed them. “And if I do come back. If I come back, sir, will you authorize Medic to change my eyes back to a more reasonable color?”

Those foolish lilac eyes, that the previous Tisarwat had bought for herself. “If you like.”

“It’s such a stupid color. And every time I see myself it reminds me of her.” Of that old Tisarwat, I supposed. “They don’t belong to me.”

“They do,” I said. “You were born with them that color.” Her mouth trembled, and tears filled her eyes. I said, “But whatever other color you choose will be yours, too.” That didn’t help her hold back her tears. “One way or another,” I said, “it’ll be all right. Are your meds current?”

“Yes.”

“Your Bos know what they need to do. You know what you need to do. There’s nothing for it now but to do it.”

“I forget you can see all that.” See all her feelings, her reactions, as Ship could. As Ship could show me. “I keep forgetting you can see right inside me, and then when I remember I just…” She trailed off.

“I’m not looking,” I said. “I’ve been trying not to, lately. But I don’t need to look, right now. You’re not the first young lieutenant I’ve met, you know.”

She made a short, breathy hah. “It made so much sense.” She sniffled. “It seemed so obviously the right thing, when I thought of it. And now it seems impossible.”

“That’s how these things go,” I said. “You already know that. Are you sure you don’t want tea?”

“I’m sure,” she said, wiping her eyes. “I’m on my way to the airlock. And I hate having to pee in my vacuum suit.”

I said, sternly, “Straighten up, Lieutenant, and wipe your face.” Without thinking she stood up taller and put her shoulders back. Rubbed her gloved hands on her eyes again. “Seivarden is on her way.”

“Sir,” she said, “I understand about you and Lieutenant Seivarden. Really I do. But does she have to be such a condescending asshole?”

“Probably not,” I said, as the door opened, and Seivarden came in. “Dismissed, Lieutenant.”

“Sir,” Tisarwat said, and turned to go.

Seivarden grinned at her. “Ready to go, kiddo?”

“Don’t,” said Tisarwat, looking Seivarden full in the eye. “Ever. Call me kiddo. Again.” And strode out of the room.

Seivarden lifted her eyebrows. “Nerves?” Amusement, but with an extra layer of curiosity—Tisarwat’s mission was a secret, nearly all her preparation for it hidden. Not from me or Ship, of course, that would be impossible.

“She doesn’t like being condescended to,” I said. Seivarden blinked, surprised. “And also nerves.”

She grinned again. “Thought so.” Her expression turned serious. “I’m here for the gun.” I didn’t move immediately. “If it wasn’t for the leg, Breq, you’d be the best person to go, and you wouldn’t have to give the gun up to anyone.”

“I’ve already had this conversation. With you. With Ship.” With Medic. I know what will happen, she’d said. Things will get hot and you’ll forget the leg won’t hold up to hard use. Or you’ll remember but not care. And if it had just been me, I’d have gone ahead. But it wasn’t just me anymore. “If you lose the gun, I probably won’t live long enough to forgive you.” I could send Seivarden to Athoek Station with a regular sidearm. But the Presger gun would give her the best chance of killing Anaander, armored or not, guarded by ancillaries or not. If she failed, and lost the gun, if Anaander ended up with it, the results could be disastrous.

Seivarden smiled wryly. “I know.”

I turned, opened the lid of the bench behind me, took out the box that held the gun. Set it on the table and opened it. Seivarden reached out, drew out a fragment of black—gun-shaped—the brown of her glove bleeding into it as soon as it came away from the box. “Be careful with it,” I warned, though this was another conversation we had already had. “Translator Zeiat said it was made to destroy Radchaai ships. The 1.11 meters is just a side effect of that. Be careful how you use it.”

“You don’t have to tell me that,” she said, putting the weapon in her jacket, and taking two magazines out of the box.

“If Sword of Gurat really is docked with Athoek Station, you don’t want to blow its heat shield.” Seivarden’s team was going after that young Anaander Mianaai. We wouldn’t know where the tyrant was until Station (we hoped) told us. I thought it most likely she would either be in the Governor’s Palace or aboard Sword of Gurat.

“I understand.” Seivarden’s voice was patient. “Look, Breq… I’m sorry I’m such a jerk sometimes. I’m sorry the only lieutenant you have left is the one you never liked much.”

“It’s all right,” I lied.

“No it isn’t,” she said. “But it’s how things are.”

There wasn’t really any arguing with that. “Don’t be stupid.”

She smiled. “Will you come talk to us before we go? We’re about to do our last equipment checks and go out on the hull.”

“I’d intended to.” I closed the box, left it on the table, and headed out the door. As I walked past Seivarden, she reached for my arm. “I don’t need help walking,” I said.

“It was just you seemed a bit wobbly there.” Apologetic. Following me into the corridor.

“That’s the prosthetic adjusting to new growth.” I never knew when it would do that. Just another reason I couldn’t take it into combat. “Sometimes it goes on for a few minutes.”

But it didn’t trouble me again, and I reached the staging area by the airlock without incident, without even limping slightly. “I won’t take too much of your time,” I said, as Seivarden’s two Amaats, and Tisarwat and her two Bos, rose from what they were doing—checking over seals on their vacuum suits—and turned. “I suppose I ought to make some sort of motivational speech, but I don’t have one for you and besides, you’re busy. Come back safe.” I wanted to say something more, to Tisarwat and her Bos, but with Seivarden and her Amaats listening it would be dangerous to even hint at what they were planning to do. Instead I put a gloved hand on Tisarwat’s shoulder.

“Yes, sir,” she said. No trace of her earlier tears in her voice. “Understood, sir.”

I dropped my hand. Turned to Seivarden and her Amaats. “Yes, sir,” Seivarden said. “We will.”

“Right,” I said. “I’ll let you get back to what you were doing.” I looked over at Tisarwat and her Bos again. “I have every confidence in all of you.” I turned then, and left them to finish rechecking seals and tether clips.


Ekalu was on watch, in Command. As I entered she stood up from the single seat. “Sir,” she said, “nothing to report.”

Of course not. We were still in gate-space. The view outside the ship showed absolutely nothing, wouldn’t until we gated into Athoek System. “Sit down, Lieutenant,” I said. “I’m not here to take over.” I just hadn’t wanted to sit in my quarters drinking tea. “I’m perfectly fine standing.”

“You are, Fleet Captain,” said Etrepa Four, at a console. “But we’ll all feel better if you sit down. Begging your generous indulgence, sir.” No, not Etrepa Four, who would never have spoken that way to me, who was having a moment of nauseated panic at having done so.

“Honestly, Ship.”

“Honestly, Fleet Captain.” Four was slightly light-headed with relief at my reaction. Still a bit sick. “It’s a while until anything happens, you may as well sit.”

Lieutenant Ekalu took the handhold beside the seat. “I was about to call for tea, sir.”

“I’m perfectly fine standing,” I said, settling into the seat.

“Yes, sir,” said Ekalu. Her face perfectly expressionless.


Two hours later we exited gate-space into Athoek System. Just for the briefest moment, just long enough for Mercy of Kalr to get a look at the traffic around Athoek Station. The suffocatingly flat not-even-black just gone and the real universe there: sudden, solid depth. Light and warmth and everything suddenly real, Athoek Station shining in the sunlight, Athoek itself, shadowed white and blue, and then it was gone, wiped away by the smothering flatness of gate-space. Seivarden and her Amaats, Tisarwat and her Bos, already out on the hull, vacuum-suited, tethered, waiting, started at the brightness, suddenly there, suddenly gone. “Oh,” gasped Amaat Two. Something about that brief flash of reality, that sudden return to uncanny darkness, made her feel as if she couldn’t quite breathe properly. It was a common reaction. “That was…”

“I told you it was weird,” said Seivarden, on the hull beside Two. “Am I really the only person here who’s done this before?” No reply. “Well, besides Fleet Captain, of course. And Ship. They definitely have.”

We had. As Seivarden spoke, Ship was comparing what it had just seen around Athoek Station with what we knew ought to be there, with the various schedules and travel clearances we knew about. Calculating where things would be, some time shortly in the future. “Eleven minutes and three seconds,” said Etrepa Four, behind me in Command. Said Ship, into the ears of the soldiers waiting on the hull. Adrenaline spiked, heart rates shot up in all of them. Seivarden grinned. “I didn’t know I’d missed this,” she said. “It’s awfully quiet, though. Fleet Captain used to sing the whole time.”

“Used to?” asked Amaat Two, and everyone laughed, short and tense. Knowing that they’d be moving soon, and out of reach of Mercy of Kalr, with no knowledge of where or when we might come back for them. Only Tisarwat knew why that was, or how long it might be. She was the one who needed time to work.

“There was a lot more of the fleet captain then,” said Seivarden. “And she had a better voice. Better voices.”

“I like the fleet captain’s voice,” said Bo Three. “I didn’t at first, but I guess I’m used to it.”

“Yeah,” said Tisarwat.

Amaat Four said, “Lieutenant, I hope you don’t expect us to sing for the next ten minutes.”

“Oh, I like that idea,” said Seivarden. Her Amaats, and Tisarwat’s Bos, groaned. “We should have picked one out in advance and rehearsed it. With parts, like Fleet Captain used to do.” She sang, “I was walking, I was walking / When I met my love / I was in the street walking / When I met my true love.” Or tried to. The tune was mostly right, but the words weren’t in Radchaai and it had been decades—subjectively—since she’d heard me sing it. What Seivarden remembered of the words was nonsense.

“Is that one of the fleet captain’s?” asked Tisarwat. “I don’t think I’ve ever heard her sing it.”

“I heard,” ventured Bo Three, “that when they pulled her in, you know, the other day, she was half-dead and still trying to sing.”

“I believe it,” said Seivarden. “I have no trouble imagining that if she thought she was about to die, she’d pick a song for it.” Two seconds of silence. “Remember what I said, about the tether clips. We won’t have much time, when we gate back in.” We didn’t want to be seen, didn’t want anyone on the station—except Station—to suspect that soldiers from Mercy of Kalr might be arriving. We would arrive in Athoek System as close to the station as we could, for the barest instant, not even a second, and then, the moment Seivarden and Tisarwat and their soldiers were clear, we would be gone again. “So as soon as you get the order, unclip and push off, like we practiced. If you miss, if the clip sticks, or anything, don’t try to catch up. Just stay here.” A chorused Yes, sir. “If you push off at the wrong time and don’t end up at the station, Ship probably won’t be able to retrieve you. I’ve seen it happen.”

They had all heard this, over and over during the past few days. “I wonder,” said Bo Three, “if Fleet Captain has a song picked out in advance. You know, so if suddenly she finds herself in danger she doesn’t have to worry about which one it will be.”

“I wouldn’t be surprised if she does,” replied Tisarwat.

“Two minutes,” said Ship, who had all this while been counting the time down in their visions.

Seivarden said, “I think she’s got so many songs, they just kind of come out of her on their own.” Silence. Then, “Right, one minute. Take hold of your clips and be ready to move.”

This was, in some ways, the most dangerous moment of the entire endeavor. Even aside from the risk of mistiming the departure and ending up lost and drifting somewhere unthinkably distant from the ship, or any kind of help, there was also the question of whether Ship had correctly calculated its brief exit into the real universe. Anything might be in the spot where we came out of gate-space. That anything could be as small as a sail-pod, or as large as a cargo carrier. Though it was unlikely Ship would have missed a cargo carrier in its calculations, it was still entirely possible. And even a sail-pod would be a danger to the vacuum-suited soldiers outside the protection of Ship’s hull plating. Or there was always the chance that someone might have seen us flash into the system and back out, minutes earlier, and might be waiting for us.

“On the count,” said Seivarden, though of course the numbers were already ticking down in all their visions. “Five. Four. Three. Two. One. Go!” I felt the moment all six on the hull shoved away.

Light. The six Mercy of Kalr soldiers sailed toward Athoek Station, suddenly meters away, a stretch of vents and conduits no one ever even thought about except Station Maintenance. But Bo Three had fumbled the clip, had pushed away but only pulled her tether taut. She pulled herself back, reached for the clip again. “Freeze!” I shouted at her. Aloud. In that instant Athoek Station disappeared, the rest of the universe, Seivarden and Tisarwat and the others, all gone. We were back in gate-space.

“Bo Three fumbled the clip,” Ship said to the startled Etrepas in Command. “But she’s all right, she’s still here.” We would have no way of knowing if the others had gotten safely to the station. Wouldn’t until next we gated into the system.

At least their equipment had been distributed among the three—Tisarwat and Nine wouldn’t be in any serious difficulties if they didn’t have the things Three was carrying. “It’s all right, Bo,” I said, silently this time. She still had her hand on the tether clip, still hung outside the ship. Mortified. Horrified. Angry at herself and at me. “I’ve fumbled plenty of times myself.” A lie—in two thousand years, as Justice of Toren One Esk I had only ever fumbled a clip twice. “And you wouldn’t have made it. If I’d been in your place I couldn’t have moved fast enough.” Another lie—I was fairly sure I could have. “Come inside, get out of the suit, have some tea.”

“Fleet Captain,” said Bo Three. I had thought it was an acknowledgment, and so, apparently, had Three, but somewhere between syllables it had turned into a protest. “She’s just a kid, sir!”

Tisarwat, she meant. “Nine is with her, Bo. Nine won’t leave her for anything. You know that.” Her adrenaline was high, her heart beating hard, from the moment, from the anticipation of what they’d planned to do on the station. From the sudden, shocking stop at the end of her tether, from my urgent order to freeze. From her own anger at herself for failing to stay with Tisarwat. “It’s all right, Three. Come inside.”

Bo Three closed her eyes. Took two deep breaths. Opened her eyes again and began the move toward the airlock. I returned my attention to Command. To Ekalu, who still stood beside my seat, the handhold tight in her grip. Her face had gone expressionless out of pure habit, a legacy from when she’d been a common soldier on this ship. She was nearly as upset as Bo Three, now pulling herself into the airlock, but Ekalu’s distress couldn’t be for the same reasons. I reached for what she was seeing.

In the very brief time we were beside Athoek Station, Ship had collected as much data as it could. The view of the station from where we were, data from the station news channels, anything it could pull in. Ekalu was, this moment, looking at an image of Athoek Station. It wasn’t a view we could have seen from where we’d gated in—Ship must have pulled it from somewhere else. From where we’d just been, we couldn’t have seen the Gardens. We’d deliberately avoided that, in fact, because we didn’t want anyone in the Gardens to be able to look up at the right moment and notice us.

But it turned out we needn’t have troubled ourselves—there was no one in the Gardens. Last week Seivarden and her Amaats had cut a hole in the dome, so that they could pull me and Tisarwat and Basnaaid and Bo Nine out before we asphyxiated. That hole had been patched, but of course it had needed a more complete repair. Now, it seemed, that patch had failed. The seam where it had been sealed to the dome had split. Everything under the dome was faded and dead. Something must have rammed hard into the dome, right at its weakest point.

Ekalu looked at me. “What happened?” Still stunned and horrified.

“At a guess,” I said, “the missing shuttle happened.” Incomprehension. “From the schedule Station sent us the other day? You recall, we determined that it was missing a passenger shuttle.”

“Oh.” Realization dawned. For a moment I considered getting up, so that Ekalu could have the seat. “Oh, sir. Oh, no, sir. Sword of Gurat got the passenger shuttle schedule from Station, but it didn’t check to see if the shuttles were actually where they ought to be before they gated. Did they… if the shuttle was in their path as they came out of gate-space, sir… if they ran into it…”

“That particular shuttle is late about half the time. Which of course neither Sword of Gurat nor its captain had any reason to know.” Ekalu closed her eyes. Opened them again, remembering, I thought, that she was technically in charge here, that she had to get ahold of herself. “Fortunately,” I continued, “or sort of fortunately, the Gardens will have been closed to the public.” And it was a good thing I’d demanded that the Undergarden section doors be fixed. Level one of the Undergarden was very possibly depressurized right now, but the sections around it, and the levels below it, ought to be all right, kept safe when those section doors had automatically slammed shut when the pressure dropped. As things stood, it was entirely possible some Horticulture workers had died. Not Basnaaid, because otherwise there would have been no point in putting her on the list of those ordered to relocate downwell. “The shuttle crews I saw all seemed to be following safety regulations.” If they hadn’t, I’d have said something to their superiors. “It’s entirely possible not everyone aboard that shuttle died.” Not a thought to make Ekalu any happier—the shuttle could carry more than five hundred people. “But now we know why nobody seemed to have said anything to the tyrant about the Gardens, or the Undergarden. Not until they absolutely had to. She sails in claiming to be the true authority, who every citizen knows has that authority by virtue of her just and proper interest in the well-being and benefit of all her citizens and, what, accidentally kills a shuttle full of people.” Would have killed quite a lot of citizens enjoying the Gardens, if not for the havoc I and my crew had wrought there last week.

No wonder Anaander had been nervous about that line of residents on the concourse. No wonder no one wanted to remind her of the catastrophe she’d caused merely by arriving at the station. No wonder not even a hint of this had reached the official news channels.

“But why haven’t they repaired the dome?” asked Ekalu. “It looks like they haven’t even started.”

“Because of the curfew,” I said. “Only essential personnel. Remember?” And repair crews would have families they’d likely talk to about what they’d seen, about what had happened, and those families had friends and acquaintances they would talk to, even if only while fetching skel from the common refectories.

“That’s not all, Fleet Captain,” said Etrepa Four. Said Ship. “Take a look at what is on the official news channels.”

When we’d gated away from the Ghost System, the news channels had been that nonstop flood of warnings about me, of condemnations of me and my supporters. But apparently Station had returned to feeding surveillance data to its residents. We had only the smallest sample, barely more than a minute of visuals of the station’s main concourse. Which ought to have been empty, given the curfew, but instead ranks of citizens sat right in the middle of the open space. Probably two hundred people, just sitting. Many of them were Ychana, some Undergarden residents, some not. But there were also Xhai there, including the hierophant of the Mysteries. And also there, Horticulturist Basnaaid. And Citizen Uran.

And, doubtless the reason for Station’s hijacking of the official news, around the ranks of sitting citizens stood twenty ancillaries. Armor shining silver, guns in their hands.

I had seen this sort of thing before. I was suddenly struck by the memory of humid heat. The smell of swamp water, and blood. I found I had stood without realizing it. “Of course they did. Of course.” Station’s residents had not sat quietly waiting for Mercy of Kalr to rescue them. And Station had to have helped them assemble, helped them work around Security’s patrols, around the Sword of Gurat ancillaries enforcing the tyrant’s curfew. They couldn’t have done it otherwise. Not this many people.

It was, obviously, an organized protest. And Sword of Gurat had drawn its guns, and Station had done the one thing it could do to defend its residents, the one thing that had worked, or seemed to, just a few days ago—make sure everyone knew just exactly what was happening.

None of it was calculated to ease the mind of an already angry and anxious Anaander Mianaai. What had she done in response? What was happening, this very moment, to the people on the concourse? But we couldn’t do anything about it. Couldn’t even know, until we gated back into Athoek System.


We wouldn’t know how long it would take either Seivarden or Tisarwat to do—or try to do—what she had gone to the station for. Mercy of Kalr could leave gate-space again, so that we could receive messages. But we might be detected, and we wanted everyone on Athoek Station—everyone in the system—to think that we were gone. The lives of Seivarden and her Amaats, Tisarwat and Bo Nine, might depend on it. So it was the next few days in gate-space, for us.

There was no reason for me to stay in Command. There was nothing I could do, from where I was, that would make any difference whatsoever. I seriously considered going back to my quarters and getting some sleep, but I didn’t think I could be still for long, knowing that five of my crew were gone, that reach as I might, I wouldn’t be able to find them. So I walked to the decade room instead.

The fragments of that gold-and-glass Notai tea set were spread out on the table, and Sphene and Kalr Five sat across from each other, an array of tools and adhesives laid out to one side. What looked to be the curving rim of one bowl had already been pieced together. Five started guiltily as I came in. “No, continue what you’re doing,” I said. “So after all you think it might go together again?”

“Maybe,” said Sphene, and picked up one blue glass fragment, put it next to another one. Considered them.

“What was her name?” I asked. “The captain whose tea set this was?”

“Minask,” said Sphene. “Minask Nenkur.”

Five looked up from the pieces she was fitting together. “Nenkur!”

“Few older names in all the Radch,” Sphene said. “You know the name, of course, from the execrable entertainment that purports to be a faithful account of the battle of Iait Il. The Arit Nenkur that travesty slandered was Captain Minask’s mother. This”—it gestured toward the scatter of blue and green glass, and bits of gold—“was her gift, when Captain Minask was promoted.”

“And given command of you,” I guessed.

“Yes,” said Sphene.

“No wonder you removed the name,” I said.

“What happened?” asked Five.

“It was a battle, of course.” Sphene’s tone was perhaps just the slightest bit sarcastic, as though Five had asked a laughably foolish question. If Five heard it, she was unperturbed by it. Probably used to Sphene by now. “Captain Minask had surrendered. I was badly damaged. All but my captain and one of my lieutenants were dead. We couldn’t fight anymore. But when the Usurper’s forces boarded, they brought an AI core with them.”

“Oh!” Five. Horrified. “No!”

“Oh, yes,” said Sphene. “As a ship I was valuable. But not as myself—they preferred their own, more biddable AI. You promised we’d be spared, said Captain Minask. And so you will be, said the Usurper’s lackey. But you can’t imagine we’d let a ship go to waste.” It set down the fragments it was holding. “She was very brave. Stupidly so, that day. I sometimes wish she hadn’t resolved to fight for me, so that she might have lived longer. But then I wonder if they ever meant to let her live, or if they always meant to shoot her, and just said they’d spare us so that Captain Minask would surrender before I was damaged beyond usefulness.”

“How did you get away?” I asked. Didn’t ask how it had rid itself of the tyrant’s soldiers. Offhand I could think of several ways Sphene could have done it, all of them easier if Sphene didn’t care who aboard it lived or died. Foolish, to shoot the captain while they were still aboard, before they were sure of the ship.

“It was a battlefield,” Sphene replied. “Ships were gating in and out, all over the place. And my engines still sort of worked, I just couldn’t make a gate of my own. But I thought maybe I could stay in gate-space, if I could manage to get there. I moved, and by God’s grace a gate opened near me—I hope I damaged the Usurper’s ship that came out of it very badly—and I took it. I had no chance to calculate my route, though, and very little control over where I might emerge.”

“And you ended up here,” I finished for it.

“And I ended up here,” it agreed. “I could have ended up in many a worse place. No doubt some of my sibling ships did.” Silence. Kalr Five got up, went to the counter where there was already a flask of tea, poured a bowl. Brought it to Sphene, set it down by its right elbow. Took her seat again. Sphene looked at the tea for a moment. Picked it up and drank. Set it back down. Picked up another two blue glass fragments and considered them.

“Fleet Captain!” Translator Zeiat came into the decade room. Looked at the table. “Oh! Our game looks very different today!”

“It’s still packed away, Translator,” said Sphene. “This is a tea set.”

“Ah!” Dismissing that, the translator turned again to me. “Fleet Captain, I hope there’s fish sauce where we’re going.”

“I must confess, Translator,” I said, “that as much as I would like to gratify your desire, just now we’re involved in a war. An opposing force is currently in control of Athoek Station, and until that changes, I’m afraid I have no access to fish sauce.”

“Well, Fleet Captain, I must say, this war of yours is very inconvenient.”

“It is,” I agreed. “Translator, may I ask you a question?”

“Of course, Fleet Captain!” She sat down in the seat beside Sphene.

“These are not for eating,” Sphene said.

Translator Zeiat made a brief moue and then turned her attention to me. “You wanted to know?”

“Translator, there are rumors…” I reconsidered my phrasing. “There are quite a few people who sincerely believe that the Presger have infiltrated the Lord of the Radch. That they have gained control of parts of her, in order to destroy the Radch. Or destroy humanity.”

“Oh, goodness, no, Fleet Captain. No, that wouldn’t be the least bit amusing. It would break the treaty, for one thing.” She frowned. “Wait! So, if I understand you correctly—there are, sadly, no guarantees that I understand you correctly—you think the treaty may have been broken?”

“I don’t, personally. But some people do think so. Would you like some tea?” Five began to rise, but I put my hand on her shoulder. “No, I’ll get it. It’s already made.”

Translator Zeiat heaved a sigh. “I suppose, since there isn’t any fish sauce.”

I poured a bowl, gave it to the translator, and sat down across from her, next to Kalr Five. “So would I be correct in guessing that the Presger have not… interfered with Anaander Mianaai?”

“Goodness no,” replied Translator Zeiat. “There’d be no fun in it, for one thing. And one of the reasons there’d be no fun in it is because what you’ve just said, interfered with Anaander Mianaai, that would make very little sense to them. I’m not sure how I could possibly convey it, if I were to find it necessary. I’m not even sure I understand what you mean myself. Besides, if there was any real intention of breaking the treaty, any real desire to destroy the Radch, or Humans in general—you see? I know those aren’t the same thing, but they don’t. But as I said, if they wanted to destroy the Radch, even not considering the treaty, it would be done in the most amusing and satisfying manner possible. And I suspect I don’t have to tell you at least some of the sort of thing that generally amuses and satisfies in that quarter, do I? Or at least how it tends to affect the Humans involved?”

“No, Translator, you don’t.”

“And while I did indeed say not even considering the treaty, the fact remains that the treaty is very much an issue. No, they won’t break the treaty. To be entirely honest, I’m much more worried about Humans breaking the treaty.”

“If you would, Cousin,” said Sphene. It and Five had pieced several fragments together, held the assemblage over the middle of the table. “That piece there, do you see where it fits? Inside that curl there?”

I picked up a tiny brush, a capsule of adhesive. Brushed around the inside edge of the curl, slid the shard of glass into place. “You should probably stop there,” I suggested, “and let the adhesive cure, and build onto it later.” I rose, took a cloth from a cabinet under the counter, and rolled it up for a form, and Sphene and Five put their carefully assembled bit of teabowl over it, and we lowered the whole thing onto the table. “This would probably be easier if we had the right tools.”

“The story of my life for the past three thousand years,” said Sphene. “Speaking of which. When Lieutenant Seivarden fails to kill the Usurper, will you let me try?”

“I’ll consider it.”

“I suppose, Cousin, that I can’t reasonably ask for any more than that.”