14



In gate-space as we were, we couldn’t receive data from Seivarden or Tisarwat, or from Amaat Two and Four, or Bo Nine. And there was no guarantee they would be reachable when we returned. So each of them had been given a tiny external archive to hide on the outside of the station’s hull. Those archives would receive and store the data for us to retrieve when we returned. Assuming they worked right, which they didn’t always. Assuming nothing damaged them. Assuming no one had found them and disabled them or otherwise disposed of them.


This is what happened while Mercy of Kalr was out of the universe:

Seivarden and her two Amaats walked cautiously through a dusty access corridor. Armed and armored, their vacuum suits left behind at the airlock they’d come in through. Station had let them in, was even now displaying a map in their visions, though they’d studied what diagrams of the station’s layout we’d already had. The diagrams, the few terse words they exchanged, said they were on their way to the governor’s residence. They had seen the news channels. Noticed people they knew, among the citizens sitting on the concourse, noticed the armored ancillaries, the drawn guns. Amaat Two said, quietly, as they walked, “Do you think Lieutenant Ti—”

“Quiet,” said Seivarden. Everyone on Mercy of Kalr knew about Tisarwat’s crush on Basnaaid.

Four said, very softly, “Fleet Captain and Lieutenant Tisarwat seem close lately.”

“Not surprised,” replied Seivarden. Angry. Anxious. Knowing now was not the time to show it. “I suspect Fleet Captain’s always had a thing for hapless baby lieutenants.”

“Can’t imagine you hapless, sir.” Four, still very softly.

“I never looked it,” said Seivarden. Surprising me by, it seemed, having found at least one source of her anxiety and not pretended it was something else, or that it didn’t exist. Maybe because she was still enjoying the familiarity of this situation, the knife-edge of adrenaline before the gunfire started. “And Justice of Toren never liked me much.”

“Huh,” said Four. Honestly surprised. Trying hard not to think too much about what was ahead.

“Our Bo lieutenant isn’t as hapless as she seemed at first,” remarked Two.

“She isn’t,” agreed Seivarden. “She’ll be fine.” Not at all certain of that, unhappy at not knowing what Tisarwat and Nine were up to. “Now cut the chatter.”

“Sir,” acknowledged Two and Four, together.


Tisarwat and Bo Nine pulled their way across the station’s hull. Not speaking. The news channels in their vision, those rows of seated citizens. The armed and armored soldiers. The citizens sat, quiet, and the soldiers stood, weapons ready.

“Turn it off, sir,” Nine said to Tisarwat, on the hull. “There’s no point watching, and you won’t pay attention to where you’re going if it’s on.”

“You’re right.” Tisarwat cut off the feed.

Twenty minutes later, moving handhold by handhold over the outside of Athoek Station, slowly and laboriously, she said, “I think I’m going to be sick.”

“You can’t be sick in your helmet, sir.” Nine almost managed to keep the terror that had struck her at Tisarwat’s words out of her voice. “That would be bad.”

“I know!” Tisarwat stopped herself, didn’t reach ahead for the next handhold. Took a few shallow breaths. “I know, but I can’t help it.”

“You did take the anti-nausea, sir, I saw you.” And then, “Don’t stop, sir. We just have to do this, that’s all. And that’s why. That’s why we have to do this.” Referring, I was sure, to what was happening on the concourse. “And if Fleet Captain were here, she’d be giving you such a look right now.”

Two more shallow breaths. Then, weakly, “Hah. At least we’d have music to listen to.” Tisarwat swallowed hard. Took another breath. Propelled herself forward to the next handhold.

“If you call that music.” Relieved—as relieved as she could be, under the circumstances—Nine followed. “I agree with you, sir, about being used to her voice, but some of those songs she sings. They’re just weird.”

“My heart is a fish.” Tisarwat’s voice thin and breathy. A shallow gasp. “Hiding in the water-grass.” Another. “In the green.”

“Well, that one’s all right,” Nine admitted. “Though it does get stuck in my head something fierce.”


Sword of Gurat was at the very end of the docks, the two bays nearest it empty, no doubt not just because of Sword of Gurat’s size. No obvious damage from the collision with the passenger shuttle—but then, there wouldn’t be. Possibly Sword of Gurat hadn’t ended up with anything more than some scratches or dents.

“Right,” said Tisarwat, taking a gulping breath, nausea returning. Exhausted and sore from the hours-long trip around the station hull. “Let’s go.” And she and Nine began pulling themselves toward Sword of Gurat.

So far Tisarwat had relied on Station’s declining to report her and Nine’s presence. But now, in sight of Sword of Gurat, that wouldn’t protect them. It was only a matter of time—and not very much time, if Sword of Gurat was paying any attention at all—before they were noticed. Still, Tisarwat and Nine moved quite slowly. Very cautiously. Very carefully chose a spot on Sword of Gurat’s hull, tethered themselves, and opened the container they’d all this time been hauling with them. Nine pulled out an explosive charge. Handed it to Tisarwat, who carefully, slowly, fixed it to Sword of Gurat’s hull.


At about this point, Seivarden and her two Amaats had made it into a cramped and dim access corridor behind the governor’s residence. It had probably at one point been meant for servants to use to go unobtrusively back and forth, but hadn’t been used in years; the floor was dusty and trackless. This wasn’t, then, the back way Governor Giarod had used to bring Translator Dlique to the residence.

Station had not spoken a word to Seivarden, or either of her Amaats. It had displayed information—maps and directions, mostly—and unlocked doors for them. Now it had brought them to a locked door in this dusty corridor, and shown them all what lay behind it: the governor’s office. The cream-and-green silk hangings were pulled nearly all the way around the walls, covering the window that looked down on the concourse, and also, helpfully, the door Seivarden and her Amaats stood behind. Empty, now, except for those few chairs, the desk. Beside the desk, a meter-and-a-half-high stack of what looked very much like suspension pods but probably were not. There were three of them in the stack, and Seivarden couldn’t help but notice them. Puzzled a moment over what they might be. The words Returning, with two Sword of Atagaris ancillaries, approx eight minutes flashed in Seivarden’s vision. Two additional Sword of Atagaris ancillaries outside the main door now.

Seivarden whispered, “Station, what are those things?”

I don’t know what you mean, came the reply, in her vision.

“Those… at first I thought they were suspension pods. But they’re not. Are they?”

I really don’t know what you mean. Approximately six minutes.

Seivarden knew enough, by now, to understand Station’s answer. “Oh, fuck,” she said, softly.

Amaat Two, behind her, seeing the same image but not having reached the same conclusion, asked, “What are they?”

“They’re fucking AI cores,” Seivarden told her. “And Station can’t talk about them.”

Two and Four stared at her, confused. Approximately five minutes, Station said.

“Right,” Seivarden said. There was no time to worry about the AI cores. No time to be afraid of three humans facing four ancillaries in five minutes’ time. Seivarden had the Presger gun and there was, in the end, only one condition that needed to be met, only one truly necessary thing. And they had planned for this, Seivarden and her Amaats, had hoped Anaander would have taken over the governor’s office, hoped they would have just such an opportunity. “Time to move.” She reached for the door’s manual release, and it obligingly slid open to reveal the back of a hanging, heavy enough that it barely trembled as the air currents shifted. Her two Amaats behind her, she stepped into the room.


There were two dozen explosive charges in the container Tisarwat and Bo Nine had brought. Tisarwat managed to attach three of them before half a dozen Sword of Gurat ancillaries came out an airlock after them.

Tisarwat and Nine surrendered immediately, went docile into the airlock. Stood silent while Sword of Gurat stripped them of their vacuum suits, stripped them to their underwear, and searched them. Neither of them, of course, had anything dangerous or suspicious. Not counting that container of charges, at any rate. The ancillaries bound Tisarwat’s and Nine’s hands behind them, and then pushed them to kneel on the corridor floor. Nine frightened but stoic, Tisarwat light-headed, hyperventilating just a bit. Terrified. And also, behind that, a tiny bit relieved. Anticipating.

The captain of Sword of Gurat arrived. Stared at Tisarwat and Nine. Examined the explosive charge Sword of Gurat’s ancillary showed her. Looked, then, at Tisarwat. “What in the name of all that’s beneficial were you trying to do?” Tisarwat said nothing, but her gasping intensified. “These weren’t even armed,” the captain of Sword of Gurat said.

Tisarwat closed her eyes. “Oh, for the love of Amaat just shoot me! Please, I beg you. I’m not even supposed to be here.” Gasping every few words now, as her breathing escaped her control entirely. “I was supposed to be in Administration, I wasn’t supposed to be on any ship at all. But I have to do what she tells me, she’s the captain. I have to do what she tells me or she’ll kill me.” Tears started. She opened those ridiculous lilac-colored eyes, looked pitifully up at the captain of Sword of Gurat. “But I can’t do it anymore, I couldn’t do what she told me, just shoot me!”

“Well,” said the captain. “A desk pilot. That explains a lot.”

Nine’s expression had been impassive through all this, but now anxiety showed on her face. “Please, sir, begging the captain’s indulgence, these past few weeks have been so awful, and she’s just a baby.”

“Not a very bright one,” said the captain. “Nor steady. Ship, get these two to Medical.”

Sword of Gurat grabbed Tisarwat’s arm to haul her up. Tisarwat cried out and, “Aatr’s tits,” swore the captain of Sword of Gurat, grimacing in disgust. “She’s pissed herself!” And if Tisarwat didn’t let up on the breathing, she’d faint in about half a minute. “At least try to act like a civilized human being, Lieutenant! Gods greater and lesser! Not even a desk pilot should act like this.”

“S… s… sir,” gasped Tisarwat. “P… please don’t make me go back there. I can’t go back to Mercy of Kalr, I’d rather die.”

“You’re not going back to Mercy of Kalr, Lieutenant. Ship.” This to the waiting ancillaries. “Take Lieutenant…”

“T… Tisarwat,” supplied Tisarwat.

“Take Lieutenant Tisarwat to the bath and get her cleaned up. Get some clean clothes on her before you take her to Medical. Take this other one to Medical now. Get them both disconnected from Mercy of Kalr.” And then, at another thought, “And Mercy of Kalr, if you’re watching, I hope you’re proud of this.”

Two Sword of Gurat ancillaries hauled Tisarwat to her feet, and half dragged, half walked her down the corridor. “Nine!” Tisarwat wailed.

“It’s all right, Lieutenant,” said Sword of Gurat’s ancillary. “She’s just going to Medical.”

Tisarwat, tearful, opened her mouth to reply, but sobbed instead. Collapsed into Sword of Gurat Gurat Eleven’s arms, clutched its uniform jacket and wept harder.

They were real tears. Sword of Gurat could hardly have mistaken false ones. And Nine’s cry of concern and struggle to reach Tisarwat were genuine as well. “You’ll see her again soon,” Gurat Eleven said, just maybe the slightest bit more gently, and guided her off to the bath, where it would be just Tisarwat and Sword of Gurat, alone. Which had been the whole point of the exercise, of course.

And Nine found herself escorted toward Medical. The next dangerous moment—the whole plan had been predicated on the assumption that Sword of Gurat didn’t have a competent interrogator aboard. A Justice almost certainly would have, but interrogators were much rarer on Swords. If Sword of Gurat had one, the next step would be drugging Nine, and the game would be up.

Almost as soon as Nine walked into Sword of Gurat’s Medical section, her archive data ended, and not long after so did Lieutenant Tisarwat’s.


And meanwhile, on Athoek Station, Anaander Mianaai came into the system governor’s office. Two Sword of Atagaris ancillaries behind her, and behind those, System Governor Giarod and Eminence Ifian. “My lord,” Ifian was saying, “of your mercy, I beg to inform… remind my lord that Station Administrator Celar is very popular. Her… her removal would be taken very badly, and not just by the troublesome elements on the station.”

That young Anaander didn’t reply, but seated herself behind the desk. The two ancillaries stationed themselves in front of it, so that Governor Giarod and Eminence Ifian found themselves at some distance from where the tyrant sat. “And you yourself, Eminence, have no influence with the residents of this station?”

The eminence opened her mouth, and for an instant I wondered if she would admit that not long ago she had staged her own sit-down on the concourse, so that she could hardly speak convincingly in condemnation of this one. But she closed her mouth again. “I had thought, my lord, that I did have some influence here. If my lord wishes, I will try to speak to them.”

“Try?” asked Anaander, with obvious contempt.

Governor Giarod spoke up. “My lord, they aren’t doing any harm where they are. Perhaps we could just… let them sit.”

“Not doing any harm yet.” The tyrant’s voice was acid. “Did you just let the ancillary walk onto the station and upend everything? Agitate the station’s dregs, suborn the AI?”

“We did question her… it, my lord,” Governor Giarod insisted. “But she always had such reasonable answers, and events nearly always seemed to bear her out. And she had orders direct from you, my lord. And your name as well.” Behind the desk, Anaander Mianaai did not respond. Did not move. “My lord, perhaps we could… perhaps we could use Fl… the ancillary’s methods. Send the soldiers away, let the people sit on the concourse if they like. So long as they’re peaceable.”

“Do you not understand,” Anaander said, “the purpose behind the ancillary’s methods? What’s happening down there”—she gestured toward the wide window, still covered by that heavy silk hanging—“is a threat. It is this station—and an alarming number of this station’s residents—refusing to accept my authority. If I allow them to do this, then what will they do next?”

“My lord,” offered Governor Giarod, “what if you were to treat this as though it were a refusal of my authority? You could say that I gave the order for the curfew, and the soldiers, and even—though it was Celar’s fault—even the transportation orders. And I would resign, and then, my lord, you would be the one responsible for restoring propriety.”

Anaander laughed, tense and bitter, and Giarod and Ifian flinched. “I’m glad to see, Governor, that after all your brain isn’t a complete waste of organic material. Believe me, if I thought that would do the least bit of good I’d have done it by now. And maybe if you hadn’t let a half-crazed ancillary run you in circles for a month, maybe if you hadn’t let that ancillary escape, and somehow manage to destroy two of the ships I brought with me, including a fucking troop carrier that would have been very helpful right now, and maybe if your gods-cursed passenger shuttles would run on time like they do everywhere else in Radch space, and maybe if your station was not obviously in the power of an enemy of the Radch, then yes, maybe it would do some good.”

Two ships. Destroyed. No wonder this Anaander was frightened. And, at a guess, exhausted. Angry and frustrated, not used to being in just one body, cut off from Tstur Palace.

Anaander continued. “No, what I need is to regain control of Station.” She stopped. Blinked. “Tisarwat?” Looked at Governor Giarod and Eminence Ifian. “That’s a familiar name. You said the ancillary brought a Lieutenant Tisarwat to the station.”

“Yes, my lord.” Giarod and Ifian, more or less in unison.

“A Lieutenant Tisarwat was just caught trying to plant explosive charges on Sword of Gurat’s hull. None of which were armed. She was captured immediately. And she is…” Anaander blinked at something in her vision. “Not exactly the sharpest knife in the set, is she.”

It was Giarod and Ifian’s turn to blink, trying, I supposed, to reconcile that description with the Tisarwat they themselves had met. I thought for a moment Ifian would say something, but she didn’t. More to the point, and very interestingly, Sword of Atagaris said nothing. “Oh, get out of here,” Anaander said, irritably.

Governor Giarod and Eminence Ifian bowed, deeply, and left so quickly as to be barely proper. When they were gone, Anaander put her head on her wrists, hands outstretched, her elbows on the desk. “I need to sleep,” she said, to no one in particular, it seemed. Maybe to the two Sword of Atagaris ancillaries. “I need to sleep, and I need to eat, and I need…” She trailed off. “Why can’t I just get a couple hours’ sleep without some kind of crisis appearing?” If she was talking to Sword of Atagaris, it didn’t answer.

Seivarden, behind the hanging, heard this with a sudden dismaying, disorienting sense of wrongness. She had known all this time what we had been doing here at Athoek, had defied Anaander herself, when we had been at Omaugh Palace. But Anaander Mianaai was still the only ruler of the Radch Seivarden had ever known, and neither she nor any other Radchaai had ever expected even the possibility that things might be different. And on top of that, here this Anaander was, alone and tired and frustrated. As though she were just an ordinary person. But Seivarden had enough experience to know that stopping to think too long about it would be fatal. She signaled her Amaats to move.

Amaat Two and Amaat Four, armor up, guns leveled, came out from behind the hanging first, one to each side of where Anaander sat behind the desk. Instantly each Sword of Atagaris ancillary drew its weapon and turned to fire at an Amaat, and two more ancillaries came swiftly into the room, guns raised.

Seivarden had positioned herself opposite Anaander, so that when the ancillaries were distracted, she might have a clear shot at the tyrant. But Seivarden was not ancillary-fast, and lifting the hanging slowed her even more, just the smallest bit, but enough for one of Sword of Atagaris to put itself between Seivarden and Anaander, just as Seivarden fired. It dropped, and before Seivarden could fire again, the other ancillary charged into her, shoving her backward so that they both fell against the hanging.

Behind the hanging was that wide window overlooking the concourse. Of course it was not easily breakable, but Sword of Atagaris’s impact had been fast and forceful. When Seivarden and Sword of Atagaris fell against it, the window popped free of its housing and fell toward the floor of the concourse, some six meters below. Seivarden and Sword of Atagaris followed.

The citizens below scrambled back out of the way, some shouting in alarm. The glass slammed into the ground, a loud and sharp report, and Seivarden hit the glass, on her back, Sword of Atagaris on top of her, the Presger gun in its grip that it had wrested from Seivarden on the way down.

The pop of gunfire, and more screams, and then, painfully loud, an alarm sounded. Bright-red stripes suddenly glowed to life on the scuffed white of the concourse floor, each of them four meters from the next. “Hull breach,” announced Station. “Clear all section doors immediately.”

At the sound of that alarm, every single person on the concourse—including Sword of Atagaris, and Seivarden, who hadn’t had even an instant to recover from her six-meter drop—immediately, unthinkingly, rolled or stepped or crawled away from those glowing red lines, and the concourse section doors came flashing down, crunching into the rectangle of window glass where it was in the way.

For a moment everyone in that section of the concourse was silent, stunned. Then someone began to whimper. “Who’s hurt?” asked Seivarden. On her hands and knees, quite possibly not aware of how she’d gotten there, the back of her armor still warm from absorbing the force of hitting the floor.

“Don’t move, Lieutenant.” Sword of Atagaris, the Presger gun aimed at Seivarden.

“Someone might be hurt,” Seivarden said, looking up at the ancillary. She dropped her armor. “Do you have a medkit this time, or are you still a miserable excuse for a soldier?” Raised her voice. “Is anybody hurt?” And then to Sword of Atagaris, who had not moved, “Come on, Ship, you know I’m not going anywhere with the section doors down like this.”

“I have a medkit,” replied Sword of Atagaris.

“So do I. Give me yours.” And as Sword of Atagaris tossed the medkit to the ground in front of her, “Aatr’s tits, what’s wrong with you?” She took both kits and went to see to the injured.

Fortunately there appeared to be only one severe injury, a person whose leg had been caught by the falling slab of glass. Seivarden medkitted her, and when she found only bruises and sprains among the other nine people trapped in the section, she tossed the remaining medkit at Sword of Atagaris’s feet. “I know you have to do what the Lord of the Radch tells you to.” Seivarden didn’t know that Tisarwat had made Sword of Atagaris as much of a free agent as possible. “But didn’t the fleet captain give you back your precious officers? That ought to count for something.”

“It would,” said Sword of Atagaris, voice flat. “If it hadn’t taken me an entire day to get my ancillaries thawed and bring my engines back online. Sword of Gurat got to them before me, and the Lord of the Radch decided they would be more useful to her in suspension.”

“Hah!” Seivarden was bitterly amused. “I don’t doubt it. I’m sure Hetnys is a much better tea table than she ever was a captain.”

“I can’t imagine why I don’t feel more friendly toward you,” said Sword of Atagaris, retrieving the medkit without for a moment losing its focus on Seivarden.

“Sorry.” Seivarden sat down on the glass. Crossed her legs. “I’m sorry, Ship. That was uncalled for.”

“What?” Impassive, but, I thought, taken aback.

“I shouldn’t’ve… that wasn’t right. I don’t like Captain Hetnys, and you know that, but there’s no reason for me to be insulting her. At a time like this. Especially to you.” Silence. Sword of Atagaris still pointing the Presger gun at Seivarden, sitting cross-legged on the ground. “I have to admit, I don’t understand why the Lord of Mianaai wouldn’t give you back your captain.”

“She doesn’t trust me,” Sword of Atagaris said. “I was too easily and too completely controlled by Justice of Toren. Seeing that, the Lord of Mianaai decided to keep the same control herself—I am told that if anything at all happens to the Lord of the Radch, all of my officers will be killed. She has them aboard Sword of Gurat. For safekeeping, she says. A Sword of Gurat lieutenant is in temporary command of me for the moment.”

“I’m sorry,” said Seivarden. And then, realizing, “Wait, what is she so afraid of? She trusts Sword of Gurat to kill Captain Hetnys if something happens to her, but she doesn’t trust it to guard her?”

“I neither know nor care,” said Sword of Atagaris. “But I am not going to see Captain Hetnys killed.”

“No,” said Seivarden. “No, of course not.”

Above, in the governor’s office, Amaat Two and Amaat Four lay facedown, still armored but disarmed, terrified, hands bound behind their backs. Before Sword of Atagaris had pinned them, they had seen the ancillary Seivarden had shot lying in the middle of the room. Amaat Two had managed to fire once at Anaander, but had not seen the results of her shot. Both Amaats had heard the section doors come down, closing the room off until Station canceled the hull breach alert. Or until someone managed to cut through the section doors, not an easy thing to do.

“You’re wounded, my lord.” An unfamiliar voice, in the ears of Seivarden’s two Amaats, but obviously an ancillary’s. Sword of Atagaris.

“It’s nothing. The bullet went right through my arm.” Anaander Mianaai, her voice tense with pain. “How the fuck did that happen, Sword of Atagaris?”

“I would guess, my lord…,” began Sword of Atagaris.

“No, let me guess. You’d never seen that door opened. Couldn’t open it even when you asked Station to unlock it. The entrances to that back access are all themselves locked. By Station. I myself foolishly trusted what I thought was my control over Station.”

A tearing sound. “If you would be so good as to let me remove your jacket, my lord.”

Despite—perhaps because of—her terror, the beginning of a laugh escaped Amaat Four as she recognized the sound of a medkit being opened. Two said, very softly, “Oh, you’re carrying medkits now.”

“There are several ways I could kill you.” The voice of another ancillary, closer to the two Amaats than the one talking to the Lord of the Radch. Very quiet. “Armored or not.”

“Station!” Anaander, either ignoring the exchange or not hearing it. “No more games. Do you hear me?”

Silence, for three seconds, and then Station said, “I was happy enough to go along, until you threatened my residents.”

Down on the concourse, standing on the remaining section of office window, Sword of Atagaris said, gun still pointed at Seivarden, “Station is done playing stupid, it seems.”

“I wasn’t the one making a threat, Station!” Anaander’s voice was incredulous, and angry. “I was trying to keep your residents safe. Trying to keep things calm and under control here, after the ancillary had stirred up so much trouble. And then.” A pause. Probably she gestured, but all the Amaats could see was the brown, gold-flecked tiles of the floor. “All this. What do you expect me to do, just let a mob take over the concourse?”

“It’s not a mob,” replied Station. “It’s a complaint. Citizens do have the right to complain to Administration.” Silence. Then Station said, “Fleet Captain Breq would have understood.”

“Ah.” Anaander. “So it comes out. But it’s not the ancillary controlling you. There are no circumstances under which my enemy would give it that ability. So who is it? And is she still here? Could she unlock your Central Access, maybe?”

“No one can unlock my Central Access,” said Station. “You’ll have to keep trying to cut through.”

“It would be easier to destroy the whole station and build again,” said Anaander. “In fact, the more I think of it the better I like that idea.”

“You won’t,” said Station. “You might as well surrender to the fleet captain. I have no intention of letting you leave that room, you’ll have killed the only instance of yourself in the system. Which is an interesting thought. In fact, the more I think of it, the better I like that idea. I’d only need to trigger the fire-suppression systems in the governor’s office.”

“You already would have if you could,” replied Anaander. “Maybe if you were a ship. But you’re not. You can’t bring yourself to deliberately kill anyone. I on the other hand have no such compunction.”

“I’m sure all the citizens downwell will be interested to hear that. Or the outstations.”

“Oh, are we on the news again?” Anaander’s voice was bitter.

“We can be, if you like.” Station, calm and serene.

“So that wasn’t involuntary, as you claimed. And it didn’t stop because I’d hit on the right access.”

“No,” replied Station. “I lied about that.”

Down on the concourse, still boxed in by the section doors, Seivarden hadn’t understood what Sword of Atagaris had meant, about Station no longer playing stupid. She said to Sword of Atagaris, “So what’s the story with those AI cores?”

“I’d expect you to know better than I would,” said Sword of Atagaris. “Isn’t that what you came here for? Isn’t that why Justice of Toren went straight to the Undergarden nearly the moment she got here?”

“No,” replied Seivarden. “Is that where they were?” And then, at a thought, “Is that why you were so… enthusiastic about running security in the Undergarden?”

“No.”

“Well then, whose are they?” Sword of Atagaris didn’t answer. “Aatr’s tits, there isn’t a third one of her, is there?”

“I neither know nor care,” replied Sword of Atagaris.

“And what is this one going to do with them? Build ships? That takes months—no, it takes years.”

“Not if the ship is already built,” Sword of Atagaris pointed out.

Above, in the governor’s office, Anaander was saying, “So we’re at an impasse.”

“Perhaps not,” said Station. Amaat Two and Amaat Four still lay facedown on the brown-and-gold tiles, still listening. “If I understand Fleet Captain Breq correctly, your argument isn’t with me or any of my residents—it’s with yourself. It’s none of my business. It only becomes my business when you threaten my residents’ safety.”

“What are you suggesting, Station?” Wary, with an undertone of anger.

“You have no reason to concern yourself with the running of this station. Those matters are more properly handled by me and by Station Administrator Celar.” Silence. “As for Sword of Gurat and Sword of Atagaris, they’re not welcome here. I do understand Sword of Gurat needs repairs and supplies, and that its officers might want leave occasionally, and that an officer is nearly always accompanied by an ancillary at such times, but I will not have whole decades interfering with my operations, or harassing my residents.”

“And what do I get in exchange for these concessions?”

“You get to live,” said Station. “You get to remain in this system. You get the Sword of Gurat decades back that are at the moment trapped until I see fit to raise the section doors. And you get a place where your ships can purchase supplies.”

“Purchase!”

“Purchase,” repeated Station. “I can’t afford to assume that I or my residents will receive any sort of benefit from the provincial palace, not for the foreseeable future. Not considering the circumstances. And I can’t afford to let you drain all this system’s resources and give nothing in exchange. Particularly when providing you with supplies and services potentially makes me a target for your enemies.” Silence. “As a show of my good faith, I will decline to charge you for the removal of the five dead Sword of Gurat ancillaries that were attempting to cut into my Central Access. You needn’t worry about their officer, she was away using the bath when the section doors went down.”

“I get your point, Station,” said Anaander. “Fine. We can deal.”