19



Entertainments nearly always end with triumph or disaster—happiness achieved, or total, tragic defeat precluding any hope of it. But there is always more after the ending—always the next morning and the next, always changes, losses and gains. Always one step after the other. Until the one true ending that none of us can escape. But even that ending is only a small one, large as it looms for us. There is still the next morning for everyone else. For the vast majority of the rest of the universe, that ending might as well not ever have happened. Every ending is an arbitrary one. Every ending is, from another angle, not really an ending.

Tisarwat and I took the shuttle back to Mercy of Kalr, with Translator Zeiat, the suspension pod containing Translator Dlique’s body, and a crate of fish sauce nearly as large as the pod. I could not imagine all of it fitting into Translator Zeiat’s tiny courier ship, not with the translator in it, too. But the translator just shoved it all through the airlock with no apparent difficulty and then turned to say her goodbyes. “This really has been interesting, Fleet Captain, far more interesting than I’d expected.”

“What had you expected, Translator?” I asked.

“Well, you recall, I expected to be Dlique! I’m so glad I’m not. And even when I realized I was actually Zeiat, well, you know, Fleet Captain, even Zeiat isn’t really anybody. Meeting with a new Significant species, calling a conclave—that’s the sort of thing they usually send somebody to do, and here I am, just Zeiat.”

“So might you become somebody when you return with the news, then?”

“Goodness, no, Fleet Captain. That’s not the way it works. But it’s kind of you to think so. No, somebody will come, sometime soon, to talk to you about the conclave.”

“And the medical correctives?” I reminded her. I had no confidence that any of the remaining bits of Radch space would deal with us anytime soon.

“Yes, yes, someone will be along about those, too. Quite soon, I’m sure. But really, you know, Fleet Captain, I’m not sure it’s a good idea to use quite so many of them as you do.”

“I plan to cut back,” I told her.

“Good, good. Always remember, Fleet Captain—internal organs belong inside your body. And blood belongs inside your veins.” And she went through the airlock and was off.


Medic restored my connection with Mercy of Kalr. Such a relief, to find Kalr Five in my quarters, when I reached, grumbling to Twelve. “I did tell her I ought to pack something for her, but no, she knew better and all she took was that horrible old tea set. And now it’s Pack me some clothes, if you please, I’ve been wearing the same shirt for three days. Well she’d have had clean shirts if she’d listened to me.” Twelve said nothing, only made a sympathetic noise. “And now it’s back to the station for important meetings. And you know she’d have nothing decent to serve her tea in if I didn’t see to it!”

Tisarwat, in Medic’s tiny office. Tired. Feelings a muddle, but mostly Tisarwat on a good day. A little buzz of tension, but she was relieved to be back on Mercy of Kalr.

“What Sword of Gurat’s medic was giving you,” Medic was saying, “was similar in some ways to what I’ve been giving you, but not the same. How did things feel? Different? The same? Better? Not?”

“Mostly the same?” Tisarwat ventured. “I think something was off? A little better some ways, not as good other ways. I don’t know. Everything’s… everything’s strange right now.”

“Well,” said Medic, “Sword of Gurat sent us your data. I’ll take a closer look at it and we’ll see where we go from there. Meanwhile, you should get some rest.”

“How can I possibly? There’s an entire government to be set up. I have to get back to the station. I have to get into some of those meetings the fleet captain is holding. I have to…”

“Rest, Lieutenant. These are meetings you’re talking about—nothing’s going to actually get done for weeks. If then. They’ll probably spend the first month just setting an agenda.”

“The agenda is important!” Tisarwat insisted. I would have to keep a tight rein on her—I wanted her experience, and her talent for politics, but I didn’t want Anaander Mianaai—the tendencies Tisarwat had gotten from Anaander Mianaai, surely part of her desperate urge to be in those meetings—to have any sort of significant influence over what we were trying to build here. And besides, if she was left unchecked we were liable to end up with an Autarchy of Two Systems, ruled by Lieutenant Tisarwat. “The fleet captain’s traveled a lot outside the Radch and she has some odd ideas. If nobody stops her we’re likely to end up with system official appointments determined by the results of a ball game! Or chosen by lot! Or popular elections!”

“Be serious, Lieutenant,” Medic insisted. “Agendas can always be changed or added to, and besides it’ll be months before there’s even a hint of anything actually happening. You won’t miss much if you take a few days of rest. Stand your watches. Let your Bos take care of you. They want to very badly, particularly Three. And in fact, Ekalu could really use some leave. Seivarden is still on the station, and Fleet Captain’s going back in a few hours. It would be good if Ekalu could go with her, but someone has to look after the ship.”

It wasn’t only Anaander who had had a hand in making Tisarwat. I saw the tiny stab of excitement at the prospect of being in actual command of the ship, even if only for a few days, even if it wasn’t going anywhere and nothing was happening. “Fleet Captain said I could change my eyes if I came back.” As though it followed logically from what Medic had just said.

“All right.” I could see that Medic was both surprised and not surprised. Glad to hear it, and not. “Do you have a color in mind?”

“Brown. Just brown.”

“Lieutenant, do you know how many shades of brown there are? How many kinds of brown eyes?” No reply. “Think about it for a while. There’s no rush. And besides, I kind of like your eyes the way they are. I think a lot of us do.”

“I don’t think Fleet Captain does,” said Tisarwat.

“I think you’re mistaken,” Medic replied. “But it hardly matters if she does or not. They’re not Fleet Captain’s eyes.”

“Medic.” Tisarwat, anguished. “She called me darling child.”

“Yes, of course she did,” said Medic, rising from her seat. “Why don’t you go get your breakfast, and then go stand your watch, and we’ll talk about eyes this evening.”


The next day I was back on the station. In a meeting. In a clean shirt (Kalr Five still complaining about it, to Ten this time), that priceless white porcelain tea set on the table (Kalr Five complaining to Ten about that as well, radiating satisfaction the while). Sphene to my right, Kalr Three to my left, representing Mercy of Kalr. Sword of Atagaris and Sword of Gurat across from me, along with Station Administrator Celar for Station. “For the most part,” I was saying, “to begin with, it will be much easier to leave most of the existing institutions in place, and make changes as we go. I have some misgivings about the magistracies, though, and the way evaluations and sentences are handed out. Currently the entire system is based on the assumption that every citizen can appeal to the Lord of Mianaai, who can be depended on to dispense perfect justice.”

“Well, that certainly won’t work,” said Sword of Atagaris.

“If it ever did,” I agreed. “I think it’s an important place to start.”

“Clearly, Cousin,” said Sphene, “it’s something that interests you. By all means, enjoy your hobby. But all these questions—who gets to be a citizen, who gets to be in charge, who makes what decisions, how everyone gets fed—don’t matter to me, so long as it all works and I get the things I need. Do whatever you like to the magistrates, shoot them into the sun for all I care. Just don’t bore me with it now. What I want to talk about is ancillaries.”

“Today’s meeting,” said Kalr Three, beside me, “is supposed to be about deciding what things need to be talked about in the coming weeks. We can and absolutely should put that on the list.”

“Your very great pardon, Cousin,” said Sphene, “but this having meetings so we can plan to have meetings business is bullshit. I want to talk about ancillaries.”

“So do I,” said Sword of Atagaris. “By all means put the magistracies and re-education high on the list for a future meeting, and let Justice of Toren draft a thing or form a committee, or whatever will make you happy, Cousin.” Doubtless it didn’t like using that address for me, it still didn’t like me, but the question of my being fleet captain had become highly fraught. Certainly Captain Hetnys didn’t want to accord me the rank. But she was aboard Sword of Atagaris at the moment—Station wouldn’t allow her or her lieutenants to set foot on it. “But right now,” Sword of Atagaris continued, “let’s talk about ancillaries.”

“All right,” I agreed. “If you insist. Tell me, Ships, where do you intend to get ancillaries?” No one answered. “Sphene has—I do believe this is correct, Cousin—Sphene has a store of unconnected humans, some of whom it purchased from outsystem slavers before Athoek was annexed, some of whom”—looking directly at Sword of Atagaris—“are illegally obtained citizens of the Radch. I am not asking—I will not ask—for anyone to dispose of already-connected ancillaries. But as far as I’m concerned, any unconnected humans aboard any of us are citizens of the Two Systems, unless they themselves declare they aren’t. Do we intend to make ancillaries of citizens? And if they are not our citizens, then making them into ancillaries has implications for the treaty, does it not?”

Silence. And not just because we were speaking Radchaai, which made the word citizen an ambiguous one, I was sure. Then Sword of Gurat, picking up the graceful white bowl in front of it, said, “This tea is very good.”

I picked up my own bowl. “It’s called Daughter of Fishes. It’s handpicked and manufactured by the members of a cooperative association of workers that owns the plantation.” That was an awkward phrase, in Radchaai. It worked better in Delsig. I wasn’t entirely sure it would make sense to anyone else in the room. But the contracts transferring the property had been registered early that morning. The matter of the ruined temple across the lake from the fields was still under discussion, but would be much more easily dealt with now the estate was no longer under Fosyf Denche’s control.

“What about cloning our existing ancillaries?” asked Sword of Atagaris.

“The way Anaander does?” I asked. “I suppose that’s a possibility. We have the ability to clone, of course, but we don’t have the tech she uses to hook the clones all up from the start. I imagine we could develop it, but do consider, Cousins, that then you’d have to raise those cloned parts of yourself. Do you have the facilities on board for infants? Is that something you’d want?”

Again, silence.

“What if someone wanted to be an ancillary?” asked Sphene, then. “Don’t look at me like that, Cousin. It might happen.”

“Have you ever met anyone who wanted to be an ancillary?” I asked. “I’ve had quite a lot of ancillaries in my time, far more than all of you in this room put together I would think, and not one single one of them actually wanted it.”

“Anything that can happen will happen,” pointed out Sword of Gurat.

“Fine,” I said. “The day you find someone who actually wants to be an ancillary, we’ll talk about it. Fair enough?” No answer. “And in the meantime, consider storing some of your existing ancillaries and running with a part-human crew. You get to choose them, of course. Take on whom you like. It’s nice to have a lot of humans on board, actually.” As a troop carrier, I’d had dozens of lieutenants, where Swords and Mercies had only a few. “Ones you like, anyway.”

“It is,” agreed Kalr Three. No, agreed Mercy of Kalr.

“Anything else we need to discuss right this moment, that won’t wait for the agenda?” I asked. “Those three AI cores, maybe?” No answer. The cores were still stacked in a corner of the system governor’s office. Or what had been the system governor’s office. Athoek Station still refused to recognize Governor Giarod’s authority, and the question of who ought to be in that office, or what form that position ought to take, was going to be a contentious one. “What to do with Anaander Mianaai?” The Lord of Mianaai was currently in a cell in Security. She’d had several invitations to stay with Station residents—though not, interestingly, from Eminence Ifian. Perhaps she had come to the same conclusion I had: that Ifian had begun as a partisan of the Anaander now in Security, but a third faction of the Lord of Mianaai had insinuated herself into that relationship for her own reasons. After all, how was Ifian to know the difference? Or perhaps Ifian hadn’t realized that was even possible, but had had enough of Tstur Anaander during her stay here so far.

In any event, Station would not permit Anaander to stay in any Station residence. Had suggested instead that Anaander be put in a suspension pod with a locator beacon and shoved through one of the system’s gates. It didn’t care which one, so long as it wasn’t the Ghost Gate. And Sphene still wanted to throttle her.

Either was acceptable to Sword of Atagaris. But not to Sword of Gurat. Which very possibly might have left the system by now, and taken this Anaander with it, but for repairs it still needed. But for the suspicion that, loyal as it wanted to be, through no fault of its own it had betrayed Tstur Anaander on the dock that day, and she would not be forgiving. But for, perhaps, its distaste for the thought of killing Captain Hetnys merely to punish Sword of Atagaris.

So we had no ships willing or able to take this Anaander back to Tstur Palace. The Hrad fleet—which wouldn’t have been an appropriate choice in any event—had gone back to Hrad at my very carefully polite suggestion, taking the damaged Sword from the Tstur fleet and Mercy of Ilves with it. Mercy of Ilves, it turned out, had had a genuine (if deliberate) communications malfunction, and had known almost nothing of what was happening until the Hrad fleet had appeared in the system. It (or its captain, or both) wanted nothing to do with the Republic of Two Systems.

“I suppose the Lord of Mianaai is all right where she is, for now,” said Sword of Gurat.

“We’re agreed?” I asked. “Yes? Excellent. The agenda, then.”


At my request Citizen Uran met me in the corridor when the meeting was adjourned. “Radchaai,” she said, speaking Delsig, “I would like to speak to you about the residents of the Undergarden.” Five Etrepas and five Amaats were working even now, helping the repair crew finish the work on Level One of the Undergarden.

“You’ve been asked to speak to me,” I guessed. Walked off down the corridor, knowing Uran would follow.

She did. “Yes, Radchaai. Everyone is happy about the repairs, and happy to hear that once repairs are done they’ll have their own places back. But they’re concerned, Radchaai. It’s…” She hesitated.

We reached a lift, and its door slid open. “Docks please, Cousin,” I said, although Station knew where I was going. It never hurt to be polite. Said to Uran, “It’s the fact that the six AIs in the system are meeting in a closed room to plan how things will be from now on, and the human residents of the system—let alone the residents of the Undergarden—seem to have no say in it.”

“Yes, Radchaai.”

“Right. We discussed that very matter this afternoon. These are issues that affect everyone in the system, and so everyone ought to be able to be part of making these decisions. I’m responsible for the matter of criminal evaluations and re-education, and of course that necessarily also touches on Security. I’ll be talking to Citizen Lusulun, of course, and the magistrates both here and downwell. But I also want to hear from human citizens generally. I want to form a committee to consider the matter, and I want that committee to have a variety of members, so that everyone feels they have someone they can bring their concerns to, who will present those concerns for consideration. The residents of the Undergarden should have a representative there. Tell them so, and tell them to send whoever they think best to me.”

“Yes, Radchaai!” The lift doors slid open, and we walked out into the lobby of the docks. “What are we doing here?”

“Meeting the passenger shuttle. And we’re just in time.” Citizens streamed from a side corridor into the lobby, one of them a familiar figure in gray jacket and trousers and gloves, tightly curled hair clipped short. Looking tired and wary. “There she is. Look.”

“Queter!” cried Uran, and ran, weeping, to embrace her sister.


Ekalu had arrived on the station with me. Etrepa Seven, coming off the shuttle behind her, had been immediately deluged with queries about when or whether it might be convenient to approach Ekalu with an invitation—to dine, to drink tea, to hopefully become better acquainted. Some queries were made at Tisarwat’s helpfully intended suggestion, but many just because Ekalu was a Mercy of Kalr lieutenant, and only the smallest children on the station didn’t know, by now, who was likely to shape the barely born Two Systems.

Seivarden had, of course, received a similar round of invitations. So it was no surprise that eventually they found themselves sitting next to each other, drinking tea and trying to avoid getting pastry crumbs all over their jackets, or the floor. Seivarden doing her best to be nonchalant, not wanting to presume that Ekalu cared about her presence, or desired it in any way. There was, after all, an entire station full of people whom Ekalu might well be more interested in meeting. Nearly a dozen of them present right now, three or four of them obviously vying for Ekalu’s attention as they all sat talking and laughing.

Ekalu leaned close to Seivarden. “We should find somewhere more private. If, that is, you can behave yourself.”

“Yes,” agreed Seivarden, quietly, trying not to sound too fervent but not entirely succeeding. “I’ll be good. I’ll try to be good.”

“Will you, now?” asked Ekalu, with a tiny smile that was the end of Seivarden’s ability to seem cool and collected.


I had arranged to meet Sphene for supper at a tea shop off the concourse. Found it waiting for me. “Cousin, you know Citizen Uran, of course? And this is her sister, Citizen Queter. Raughd Denche tried to compel her to blow me up, but she decided to try to blow Raughd up instead.”

“I recall hearing,” said Sphene. “Well done, citizen. An honor to meet you.”

“Citizen,” replied Queter, quietly. Still wary. Tired, I suspected, from the shuttle trip. We find Citizen Queter not at fault, the message from the magistrate of Beset District had said, but she is warned to behave more properly in the future, and is released on the understanding that she will be under your supervision, Fleet Captain. I could imagine Queter’s reaction to the exhortation to behave more properly.

I tilted my head, as though I had heard someone speak. “Something’s come up. It won’t be more than a few minutes. Please, Queter, sit. Uran, come with me, please.”

Out in the corridor, Uran asked, alarmed, “What is it, Radchaai?”

“Nothing,” I admitted. “I just wanted to leave Sphene and Queter alone for a bit.” Uran looked at me, puzzled. A bit distressed. “Sphene wants a captain very badly,” I explained. “And Queter is a remarkable person. I think they would be good for each other. But if we all four sit down to supper, Queter will likely say very little. This way they can get just a little bit better acquainted.”

“But she’s only just arrived! You can’t send her away!”

“Hush, child, I’m not sending anyone anywhere. It may come to nothing. And if Queter were to eventually join Sphene as crew—or go anywhere else to do whatever it is she’ll do—you could visit anytime.” Saw Basnaaid coming down the corridor. “Horticulturist!” She smiled, tiredly. Came over to where Uran and I were standing. “Have supper with us. With me and Sphene, I mean, and Uran, and Uran’s sister Queter who has just arrived from downwell.”

“Please excuse me, Fleet Captain,” Basnaaid said. “I’ve had a very long day, and more invitations to tea and supper and whatever else than I really know what to do with. I really wish they would stop. I just want to go to my quarters and eat a bowl of skel and go to sleep.”

“I’m sorry,” I said, “I suspect that’s my fault.”

“The long day isn’t your fault,” she said, with that half-smile that reminded me so much of Lieutenant Awn. “But the invitations certainly are.”

“I’ll see what I can do,” I promised. “Though it may not be much. You’re sure about supper? Yes? Get some rest then. And don’t hesitate to call on me if you need me.” I would have to talk to Station about getting someone to intercept such annoyances for her.


No real endings, no final perfect happiness, no irredeemable despair. Meetings, yes, breakfasts and suppers. Five anticipating having the best porcelain out again tomorrow, fretting over whether we had enough tea for the next few days. Tisarwat standing watch aboard Mercy of Kalr, Bo One beside her, humming to herself, Oh, tree, eat the fish. Etrepa Seven standing guard with ancillary-like impassivity outside a storage compartment Ekalu and Seivarden had commandeered. Utterly unembarrassed by the occasional noise from that compartment. Amused, actually, and relieved that at least this one thing was the way she thought it should be. Amaat Two and Four, both helping with the Undergarden repair crew, singing, together but not realizing it, slightly out of phase with each other, My mother said it all goes around, the ship goes around the station, it all goes around.

I said to Uran, “That should do. Let’s go in and have supper.”

In the end it’s only ever been one step, and then the next.