5



Xhenang Serit, the seat of Beset District, sat at the mouth of a river where it came down out of the mountains into the sea, black and gray stone buildings close around the river mouth, spread along the seashore and up the green hillsides. It was (at least in its central neighborhoods) a city of bridges, of streams and fountains—in courtyards, in the outer walls of houses, running down the centers of boulevards—so that the sound of water was with you everywhere you went.

The district’s detention center was up in the hills, out of sight of the main part of the city. It was a long, low building with several inner courtyards, the whole surrounded by a two-meter-high wall that, if it had been on the other side of the hilltop, would have blocked any view of the sea. Still, the setting was pleasant enough, with grass and even some flowers in the courtyards. All of Beset District’s long-term or complicated cases were sent here, nearly all of them destined for interrogation and re-education.

There was, it appeared, no facility for visitors to meet with inmates, not counting the actual interrogation rooms. At first, in fact, the staff objected to my seeing Citizen Queter at all, but I insisted. Ultimately they brought her to me in a corridor, where a long bench sat under a window that looked out on the black stone wall and a stretch of thin, pale grass. Kalr Five stood some meters away, impassive and disapproving—I had made her stay out of earshot in order to give at least the illusion of privacy. Sphene stood beside her, just as impassive. It had kept close to Five since we’d left the station, partly, I thought, to annoy her. The ancillary still behaved as though the shattered tea set meant nothing to it, but I suspected it always knew where that red, blue, and gold box was. Five had left it on the station, and told Kalr Eight that if Sphene had stayed behind, she’d have been sure to bring the box with her.

“I didn’t think you would come,” Queter said, in Radchaai, without any courteous preamble, or a bow. She wore the plain gray jacket, trousers, and gloves that were standard issue for any citizen who didn’t have the wherewithal to purchase anything else. Her hair, which she used to braid and tie back with a scarf, was cut short.

I gestured an acknowledgment of her words, and an invitation to sit on the bench. Asked, in Delsig, “How are you?”

She didn’t move. “They don’t like me to speak anything but Radchaai,” she said, in that language. “It won’t help with my evaluation, they tell me. I’m fine. As you see.” A pause, and then, “How is Uran?”

“She’s well. Have they been giving you her messages?”

“They must have been in Delsig,” Queter said, with only a trace of bitterness.

They had been. “She wanted very badly to come with me.” She had wept when I’d told her that Queter had asked that she not.

Queter looked away, toward the end of the corridor where Five stood, Sphene beside her, and then back. “I didn’t want her to see me like this.”

I had suspected as much. “She understands.” Mostly she did. “I’m to give you her love.” That struck Queter as funny. She laughed, brief and jagged. “Have you had any outside news?” I asked, when she didn’t say anything. “Did you know the fieldworkers on the mountain tea plantations have all stopped work? They won’t go back, they say, until they’re given their full wages, and their rights as citizens are restored.” Fosyf Denche had cheated her fieldworkers for years, kept them in debt to her, and being transportees from Valskaay they’d had no one beyond the tea fields to speak up for them.

“Hah!” Suddenly, fiercely, she smiled. Almost like her old self, I thought. Then the smile was gone—though the fierceness was still there. Mostly hidden. Her arms still straight at her sides, she made her gloved hands into fists. “Do you know when it’s going to be? When I ask they tell me it’s not good for me to worry about it. It won’t help with my evaluation.” Definitely bitter that time.

“Your interrogation? I’m told it’s tomorrow morning.”

“You’ll make sure they don’t do anything they aren’t supposed to?”

And she hadn’t thought I would come. “Yes.”

“And when they… when they re-educate me? Will you be there?”

“If you want me to, I’ll try. I don’t know if I can.” She didn’t say anything, her expression didn’t change. I switched languages, back to Delsig. “Uran really is doing well. You’d be proud of him. Shall I let your grandfather know you’re all right?”

“Yes, please.” In Radchaai still. “I should go back. They get nervous here if anything doesn’t go according to routine.”

“I apologize for causing you difficulties. I wanted to see for myself that you were well, and I wanted you to know that I had come.” A brown-uniformed guard approached the end of the corridor behind Queter, obviously having been waiting for the least signal that our conversation might be over.

Queter said only, “Yes.” And went with the guard away down the corridor, the very image of calm and unconcern, except that her hands were still clenched into fists.


I took the cable tram back down the hill, Xhenang Serit spread black and gray and green below me, the sea beyond. Five and Sphene on the seats behind me. Kalr Eight was with Translator Zeiat at a manufactory down by the water, watching a slithering, silver mass of dead fish tumble into a wide, deep vat, while a visibly terrified worker explained how fish sauce was made. “So, why do the fish do this?” asked Translator Zeiat, when the worker stopped for breath.

“They… they don’t have much choice in the matter, Translator.”

Translator Zeiat thought about that a moment, and then asked, “Do you think fish sauce would be good in tea?”

“N… no, Translator. I don’t think that would be entirely proper.” And then, trying, I supposed, to salvage some shred of sense out of the experience, “There are these little cakes that are shaped like fish. Some people like to dip them in their tea.”

“I see, I see.” Translator Zeiat gestured understanding. “Do you have any of those here?”

“Translator,” said Kalr Eight, before the worker was forced to admit that no, she did not have any fish-shaped cakes at this particular moment, “I’m sure we can find you some later today.”

“Next,” announced the manufactory worker, with a grateful look at Eight, “salt is added to the fish…”


On Athoek Station, Tisarwat sat talking with the head priest of the Mysteries. This was a local sect, very popular not only with the Xhai here but also with outsystem Radchaai. The hierophant of the Mysteries was, herself, popular and influential. “Lieutenant,” the hierophant was saying, “I will be entirely frank. This business appears to be some argument between Eminence Ifian and your fleet captain.” The hierophant’s apartment sat above and behind the temple of the Mysteries. It was small, as such apartments go, and the brightly lit room they sat in was plainly furnished, just a low table and a few chairs with undecorated cushions. But orchids bloomed by the dozen on shelves and in brackets around the walls, purple and yellow and blue and green, and the air was sweet with their scent. It wasn’t uncommon for station residents to scrimp a little on their water ration in order to keep a plant or two, but this lush growth wasn’t a result of the hierophant’s saving a bit of water out of her bath every now and then. “I would also observe,” she continued, “that the eminence certainly hasn’t taken a step like this, particularly in obvious opposition to the station administrator, without being certain of the support of Governor Giarod. You want me to step in the middle of that. And for what? I don’t have the training to do the daily cast, and even if I did I’m sure most citizens wouldn’t accept it from me.”

“You might be surprised,” observed Tisarwat, with a calm smile. Her distress at losing control of Undergarden residents’ communication with Station Administration had faded, now she had this challenge in front of her. “You’re widely respected here. But Station Administrator Celar will make the casts, starting tomorrow morning. After all, you don’t have to be a priest to do it, and Station Administrator Celar does actually have the training, although she hasn’t used it for some time. No, all we’re asking for is births and funerals. And maybe not every station resident will find that acceptable, but quite a lot of Xhai will, I think.”

If the hierophant felt any surprise at having this conversation with someone as young and presumably inexperienced as Tisarwat, she didn’t show it. “Quite a lot of Xhai wouldn’t mind at all if the Ychana were permanently expelled from the Undergarden. Or better yet forcibly shipped downwell or to the outstations. Which is the likely outcome of the eminence getting what she wants, I suspect. So those Xhai who might be disposed to accept my services are likely also disposed to support the eminence. And Eminence Ifian is my neighbor, and for reasons I’m sure I don’t need to explain to you, I’d prefer to remain on good terms with her. So I ask you again, why should I put myself in the middle of this?”

Lieutenant Tisarwat still smiled, and I saw a tiny surge of satisfaction. As though the priest had just walked into a trap Tisarwat had laid. “I don’t ask you to put yourself anywhere. I ask you to be where you are.”

The hierophant’s eyes widened in surprise. “Lieutenant, I don’t recall inducting you. And you’re young enough I’d remember it.” Innocuous as Tisarwat’s words had seemed to me, they must have referred to the Mysteries somehow. And of course Anaander Mianaai would be familiar with them—no mysteries or secret societies that didn’t admit the Lord of the Radch were allowed to continue.

Tisarwat frowned, false puzzlement. “I don’t know what you mean, Hierophant. I only intended to say that you know where justice lies in this situation. Yes, technically the Ychana were in the Undergarden illegally. But you know well enough that before any of them moved there, their Xhai neighbors will have done everything they could to drive them away. They found a way to live despite that, and now, through no fault of their own, they’re cast adrift. And for what? For the foolish prejudices of some Xhai, and Eminence Ifian’s determination to pursue a feud with the fleet captain. One the fleet captain has no interest in, by the way.”

“Nor you, I gather,” observed the hierophant dryly.

“I want to sleep somewhere besides out in a corridor,” Tisarwat replied. “And I want my neighbors back in their own homes. Fleet Captain Breq wants the same. I don’t know why Eminence Ifian has taken against the fleet captain, and I certainly don’t understand why she’s chosen a way to do it that leaves so many station residents not only in uncomfortable circumstances but in doubt of their futures. It seems as though she’s forgotten that the authority of the temple isn’t properly wielded for one’s own convenience.”

The hierophant drew a considering breath. Blew it out with a quick hah. “Lieutenant, with all respect, you are one manipulative piece of work.” And before Tisarwat could protest her innocence, “And this business I hear about a conspiracy, about the Lord of the Radch having been infiltrated by aliens?”

“Mostly nonsense,” Tisarwat replied. “The Lord of the Radch is having an argument with herself, and it’s broken out into open fighting on the provincial palace stations. Some military ships have chosen one faction or the other, and they’re responsible for the destruction of several intersystem gates. The system governor feels it would be… counterproductive to announce this generally.”

“So you’ll just spread it as a rumor.”

“Hierophant, I’ve said nothing about it to anyone until now, and that only because you’ve asked me directly, and we’re alone.” Not, strictly speaking, true—Station could hear, and there was almost certainly a servant or another priest nearby. “If you’ve heard it as a rumor, it won’t have come from Fleet Captain Breq, or me, or any of our crew, that I know of.”

“And what is this supposed argument about, and which faction do you support?”

“The argument is a complicated one, but it mostly involves the future direction of Anaander Mianaai herself, and Radch space with her. The end of annexations, the end of making ancillaries. The end to certain assumptions about who is fit to command—these are things that Anaander Mianaai is quite literally divided over. And Fleet Captain Breq doesn’t support either one. She’s here to keep this system safe and stable while that argument plays out in the palaces.”

“Yes, I’ve noticed how much more peaceful Athoek has been, since you arrived.” The priest’s voice was utterly serious.

“It was such a haven of prosperity and justice for every citizen before,” Tisarwat observed, just as seriously. Leaning just a bit on that every citizen.

The priest closed her eyes and sighed, and Tisarwat knew she had won.


On Mercy of Kalr, Seivarden had just come off duty. Now she sat on her bunk, arms tightly crossed. The corrective still on her hand, but nearly finished with its work. “Lieutenant,” Ship said in her ear, “would you like some tea?”

“It was a compliment!” For the past few days, Ekalu had been stiffly, formally correct in her every interaction with Seivarden. Everyone on board knew something had gone wrong between them. None of them knew about her kef addiction, and would not recognize that arms-crossed gesture for what it was, a sign that the stresses of the past few days—probably weeks—had piled up beyond her ability to cope.

“Lieutenant Ekalu didn’t take it as a compliment,” Ship pointed out. And told Amaat Four to hold off on bringing tea.

“Well I meant it as one,” insisted Seivarden. “I was being nice. Why doesn’t she understand that?”

“I’m sure the lieutenant does understand that,” Ship replied. Seivarden scoffed. After a pause of three seconds, Ship added, “Begging the lieutenant’s indulgence,” and Seivarden blinked and frowned in confusion. It wasn’t the sort of thing a ship generally said to its own officers. “But I would like to point out that as soon as Lieutenant Ekalu let you know that actually, your intended compliment was offensive to her, you immediately stopped trying to be nice.”

Seivarden stood up off the bunk, arms still crossed tight, and paced her tiny quarters, all of two steps long. “What are you saying, Ship?”

“I’m saying I think you owe Lieutenant Ekalu an apology.” Downwell, halfway down the hillside on the cable tram, I was startled back to myself. I had never, ever heard a ship say something that directly critical to an officer.

But just days ago Ship had declared itself someone who could be a captain. Essentially an officer itself. And ultimately it was I who had suggested the idea, weeks ago at Omaugh Palace. I shouldn’t have been surprised. I reached again. Seivarden had stopped still, had just said, indignant, “Owe her an apology? What about me?”

“Lieutenant Seivarden,” said Ship, “Lieutenant Ekalu is hurt and upset, and it was you who hurt and upset her. And this sort of thing affects the entire crew. For which, may I remind you, you are currently responsible.” As Ship spoke, Seivarden’s anger intensified. Ship added, “Your emotional state—and your behavior—have been erratic for the past few days. You have been insufferable to everyone you’ve dealt with. Including me. No, don’t punch the wall again, it won’t do any good. You are in command here. Act like it. And if you can’t act like it—which I am increasingly convinced is the case—then take yourself to Medical. Fleet Captain would say the same to you, if she were here.”

That last hit Seivarden like a blow. With no warning her anger collapsed into despair, and she sat heavily on her bunk. Drew up her legs and put her forehead on her knees, arms still crossed. “I fucked it up,” she moaned after a few moments. “I got another chance and I fucked it up.”

“Not irrevocably,” replied Ship. “Not yet. I know that considering the condition you’re in right now, it’s pointless to tell you to stop feeling sorry for yourself. But you can still get up and go to Medical.”

Except Medic was that moment on watch. “The problem is,” Medic said, silently, to the information Ship had just given her, “to even start, I’m going to need up-to-date aptitudes data to work with, and I don’t have that. And I’m not a tester or an interrogator. I’m just a regular medic. Some things I could handle, but I’m afraid this is beyond me. And I’m not sure we could trust any of the specialists here in the system. We have the same problem with Lieutenant Tisarwat, of course.” She gave an exasperated sigh. “Why is this happening now?”

“It’s been waiting to happen,” Ship replied. “But to be honest at first I thought it wouldn’t. I underestimated how much better Lieutenant Seivarden does emotionally when Fleet Captain is here.”

“Medic’s on watch,” Seivarden said, still curled into herself on her bunk.

Sitting in Command, Medic said, “Fleet Captain can’t always be here. Does she know this is happening?”

“Yes,” Ship said to Medic, and to Seivarden, “Pull yourself together, Lieutenant. I’ll have Amaat Four bring you tea, and you can get cleaned up and then you need to talk to Lieutenant Ekalu and let her know she’s going to be in command for a few days. And it would be good to apologize to her, if you can do that in a sensible way.”

“Sensible?” asked Seivarden, raising her head up off her knees.

“We’ll talk while you’re having your tea,” said Ship.


I had upset the staff at the detention center with my insistence on seeing Queter. They had, I suspected, appealed to the district magistrate, who did not dare call me to account. Besides, she wanted something from me, so instead of complaining to me, she invited me to dinner.

The district magistrate’s dining room looked out onto steps down to a wide, brick-paved courtyard. Leafy vines with sweet-smelling white and pink flowers tumbled out of tall urns, and water trickled down one wall into a wide basin in which fish swam and small yellow lilies bloomed. Servants had cleared supper away, and the magistrate and I were drinking tea. Translator Zeiat stood beside the basin, staring fixedly at the fish. Sphene sat on a bench in the courtyard outside the tall, open doors, a few meters from where Kalr Five stood straight and still.

“That’s a song I haven’t heard in years, Fleet Captain,” said the district magistrate, where we sat drinking tea, looking out on the darkening courtyard.

“I apologize, Magistrate.”

“No need, no need.” She took a drink of her tea. “It was one of my favorites when I was young. I found it quite romantic. Thinking of it now, it’s very sad, isn’t it.” And sang, “But I will sustain myself / With nothing more than the perfume of jasmine flowers / Until the end of my life.” Faltering a bit at the last—she’d taken her pitch from my humming and it was just a touch too high for her comfort. “But the daughters breaking the funeral fast are in the right. Life goes on. Everything goes on.” She sighed. “You know, I didn’t think you’d come. I was sure Citizen Queter meant merely to annoy you. I almost didn’t pass the request on.”

“That would have been illegal, Magistrate.”

She sighed. “Yes, that’s why I did pass it on.”

“If she asked for me in such extremity, how could I ignore her?”

“I suppose.” Outside, Translator Zeiat bent lower over the lily-blooming basin. I hoped she didn’t dive in. It struck me that if she had been Translator Dlique, she might well have done exactly that. “I wish, Fleet Captain, that you would consider exercising your influence with the Valskaayan fieldworkers on Citizen Fosyf’s tea plantation. You have no reason to be aware of it, but there are people who would be glad of any excuse to damage her. Some of them are in her own family. This work stoppage is just giving them opportunity to move against her.” This was hardly a surprise, given Citizen Fosyf Denche’s penchant for cruelty. “The local head of Denche is an extremely unpleasant person, and she’s hated Fosyf’s mother since they were both children. The mother being gone, she hates Fosyf. She’ll take the plantation away from Fosyf if she can. This might give her enough leverage to do it, especially since so many intersystem gates are down and the Lord of Denche is unreachable just now.”

“And the workers’ grievances?” I asked. “Have they been dealt with?”

“Well, Fleet Captain, that’s complicated.” I failed to see what was complicated about paying workers fairly, or providing them with the same basic rights and services due any citizen. “Really, the conditions on Fosyf’s plantation aren’t much different from any of the others in the mountains. But it’s Fosyf who will take the brunt of this. And now some of the more troublesome of the Xhai are getting into the act. You may know there’s a small, ruined temple on the other side of the lake from Fosyf’s house.”

“She mentioned it.”

“It was nothing but weeds and rubble when we arrived six hundred years ago. But lately we’ve had people claiming it’s always been a sacred spot, and that Fosyf’s house is actually a stop on an ancient pilgrimage trail. Fosyf herself encourages the belief, I suppose she finds it romantic. But it’s ridiculous, that house was built less than a hundred years before the annexation. And did you ever know a pilgrimage spot that wasn’t surrounded by at least a town?”

“One or two, actually,” I replied. “Though generally not temples with priests that needed supporting. It’s possible this one didn’t have a resident priesthood.” The district magistrate gestured acceptance of my point. “Let me be frank, Magistrate. It’s you who are under pressure here.”

Anaander Mianaai had given me her house name, when she had declared me human, and a citizen. It was a name that said I belonged to the most powerful family in Radch space, a name no Radchaai could ignore. Because of what I was—the last remnant of a military ship that for some two thousand years had been intimately acquainted with the daughters of quite a few of the wealthiest, most prominent of Radchaai houses—I had, when I wished, the accent and the manners to match. I might as well use them.

“You’ve long been friends with most of the prominent tea growers,” I said, “but it’s become clear that the demands of the fieldworkers are just and it is—or it should be—a personal embarrassment to you that it took an attempted murder and a work stoppage for you to notice what was happening. You will be even more embarrassed when you’ve interrogated Citizen Raughd. You haven’t yet, have you.” Out in the courtyard, Translator Zeiat folded over one of the wide, round lily pads to look at its underside.

“I was hoping,” replied the magistrate, unable to keep her anger entirely out of her voice, “that she and her mother might be reconciled first.”

“Citizen Fosyf will only take her daughter back if it seems advantageous to herself. If you’re truly interested in Citizen Raughd’s welfare, interrogate her before you make any further attempts to reunite her with her mother.”

“You’re interested in Raughd’s welfare?”

“Not particularly,” I admitted. “Not on a personal level. But you clearly are. And I am interested in the welfare of Citizen Queter. The sooner you discover for yourself what sort of person Raughd is, the better basis you’ll have for judging Queter’s actions. And the better basis for deciding if sending Raughd back to her mother is really going to be good for her. Consider how easily, how coldly, Fosyf disowned her, and consider that people like Raughd don’t spring from nowhere.”

The magistrate frowned. “You’re so sure you know what sort of person she is.”

“You can easily discover for yourself if I’m right. And as for my intervening in the dispute between the workers and the growers—I won’t. Instead I’ll advise you to meet with the tea growers and the leaders of the fieldworkers without delay and settle this matter in the way you know it must be settled. Then set up a committee to investigate the history of the temple on the lake and ways to resolve the dispute surrounding it. Be sure everyone with an interest in the matter is represented. Concerned citizens may direct their complaints to the committee, who can take them into consideration during their deliberations.” The district magistrate frowned again, opened her mouth to protest. Closed her mouth. “Anaander Mianaai is at war with herself,” I continued. “That war may reach Athoek, or it may not. Either way, because at least one of the intersystem gates between us and the provincial palace is down, we can’t expect any help or advice from them. We must see to the safety of the citizens here ourselves. All the citizens here, not just the ones with the right accents, or the proper religious beliefs. And we have, for whatever reason, the attention of the Presger.”

“At war with herself, you say?” asked the magistrate. “And the Presger here, as you yourself have just pointed out? I’ve heard rumors, Fleet Captain.”

“This is not the doing of the Presger, Magistrate.”

“And if that’s the case, Fleet Captain, where does your authority come from? Which of her sent you here?”

“If Anaander Mianaai’s war with herself comes here,” I said, “and citizens die, will it matter which Lord of the Radch it was?” Silence. Five had been watching Translator Zeiat, and I knew that she or Ship would say something to me if anything happened that needed my attention. I glanced idly toward the courtyard.

Translator Zeiat straddled the basin’s edge, one leg in the water, and one arm, shoulder deep. I stood and strode out to the courtyard, reaching as I did for Ship. And quickly discovered that neither it nor Kalr Five had told me what was happening because they were arguing with Sphene.

Arguing was perhaps too dignified a word for it. Sphene’s close shadowing of Five apparently hadn’t produced the results it wanted, and while my attention had been on my conversation with the district magistrate it had been speaking to Five. Needling, with a success that was clearly demonstrated by the fact that neither Five nor Ship had brought it to my attention, and both were intent on replying in kind. As I came up next to Five, Sphene said, “Just sat there, did you, while she maimed you? But of course you did, and probably thanked her for it, too. You’re one of her newer toys, she can make you think or feel anything she wants. No doubt her cousin the fleet captain can do the same.”

Five, her ancillary-like calm gone, replied. Or maybe it was Ship who spoke, it was difficult to tell at that moment. “At least I have a captain. And a crew, for that matter. Where’s yours? Oh, that’s right, you misplaced your captain and haven’t been able to find another. And nobody aboard you wants to be there, do they.”

Ancillary-fast, Sphene rose from the bench it had been sitting on and moved toward Five. I put myself between them, grabbed Sphene’s forearm before it could strike either of us. Sphene froze, its arm in my grip. Blinked, face expressionless. “Mianaai, is it?”

I had moved faster than any Radchaai human could. There was no escaping the obvious conclusion—I was not human. My name made the next (incorrect) conclusion just as obvious. “It is not,” I said. Quietly, and in Notai, because I wasn’t sure where the magistrate was just now. “I am the last remaining fragment of the troop carrier Justice of Toren. It was Anaander Mianaai who destroyed me.” I switched back to Radchaai. “Step back, Cousin.” It was motionless for an instant, and then almost imperceptibly it shifted its weight back, away from me. I opened my hand, and it lowered its arm.

I turned my head at a splash from across the courtyard. Translator Zeiat stood upright now, one leg still in the water, one arm soaked and dripping. A small orange fish wriggled desperately in her grip. As I watched she tilted her head back and held the fish over her mouth. “Translator!” I said, loud and sharp, and she turned her head toward me. “Please don’t do that. Please put the fish back in the water.”

“But it’s a fish.” Her expression was frankly perplexed. “Aren’t fish for eating?” The district magistrate stood at the top of the steps into the courtyard, staring at the translator. Quite possibly afraid to say anything.

“Some fish are for eating.” I went over to where the translator stood half in and half out of the water. “Not this one.” I cupped my hands, held them out. With a little scowl that reminded me of Dlique, Translator Zeiat dropped the fish into my outstretched hands, and I quickly tipped it into the basin before it could flip out onto the ground. “These fish are for looking at.”

“Are you not supposed to look at the fish you eat?” Translator Zeiat asked. “And how do you tell the difference?”

“Usually, Translator, when they’re in a basin like this, especially in a home, they’re on display, or they’re pets. But since you’re not used to making the distinction, perhaps it’s best if you ask before you eat anything that hasn’t explicitly been given to you as food. To prevent misunderstandings.”

“But I really wanted to eat it,” she said, almost mournfully.

“Translator,” said the district magistrate, who had come across the courtyard while the translator and I were talking, “there are places where you can pick out fish to eat. Or you can go down to the sea…” The magistrate began to explain about oysters.

Sphene had left the courtyard while I was occupied with the translator. Quite possibly it had left the house. Five stood, once again her usual impassive self. Apprehensive of my attention, and ashamed.

And who had been responsible for that altercation? Ship had given Five words to say, but Five had not been dispassionately reading off Ship’s message. Ship’s words had appeared in Five’s vision more or less at the same instant as she spoke, and while Five had deviated slightly from Ship’s exact phrasing, it was clear that in that moment they both had been overtaken with the same urge to say the same thing.

Translator Zeiat seemed quite taken with the idea of oysters; the district magistrate was talking about beds around the river mouth, and boats that could be hired to take her to them. That was tomorrow settled, then. I turned my attention back to Five. Back to Ship. They both watched me.

I knew what it was to have Anaander Mianaai alter my thoughts, and attempt to direct my emotions. I didn’t doubt that the removal of Mercy of Kalr’s ancillaries had begun with the Lord of the Radch doing just that. Nor did I doubt, given my own experience and the events of the past few months, that more than one faction of Anaander Mianaai had visited Mercy of Kalr and each at least attempted to lay down her own set of instructions and inhibitions. I’ve been unhappy with the situation for some time, it had said, when we’d first met, and likely that was as much as it was able to say. And Mercy of Kalr wasn’t vulnerable only to Anaander Mianaai. I had accesses that would let me compel its obedience. Not as far-reaching as Anaander Mianaai’s, to be sure, and to be used with the greatest caution. But I had them.

Someone who could be a captain was, presumably, a person, not a piece of equipment. Didn’t (in theory at least) have to worry about her builder and owner altering her thoughts to suit that owner’s purposes, let alone doing it in uncomfortably conflicting ways. Someone who could be a captain might obey someone else, but it was through her own choice. “I understand,” I said, quietly, while the translator and the magistrate were still occupied with their conversation, “that Sphene is incredibly annoying, and I know it’s been trying for days to get a rise out of you.” No term of address, because I was talking to both Ship and Five. “But you know I’m going to have to reprimand you. You know you should have kept silent. And you should have kept your attention on the translator. Don’t let it happen again.”

“Sir,” acknowledged Five.

“And by the way, thank you for talking to Lieutenant Seivarden.” Five knew the basic outlines of what had happened, she was never entirely out of contact with the rest of her decade. “I thought you handled that well.” In Medical, aboard Mercy of Kalr, Seivarden slept. Amaat One, apprehensive, going over policies and regulations with Ship, because she would have to stand Seivarden’s watch in a few hours. She already knew everything she needed to know, and Ship was always there to help. It was just a matter of officially demonstrating it. And of her reminding herself that she did know it. Ekalu, on watch herself, was still angry. But after some (rather fraught) discussion with Ship, Seivarden had managed a short, simple apology that had not placed blame anywhere but on herself, and had not demanded anything from Ekalu in return. So Ekalu’s anger had lessened, had faded into the background of anxiety surrounding her suddenly being in command.

“Thank you, sir,” Kalr Five said again. For Ship.

I turned back to the translator. The topic had strayed from oysters back to the fish in the courtyard basin. “It’s all right,” the magistrate was saying. “You can eat one of the fish.”

I didn’t know whether to be relieved or alarmed at the fact that it took Translator Zeiat less than five minutes to find (and catch) the exact same one, and swallow it down, still wriggling.