So once the humans had gotten me put back together enough to be stable and to stop my performance reliability from dropping, we had to move my active consciousness into an isolation box so ART could get rid of the contaminated code string. I say “we” but I was mostly just along for the ride.

It would have been lonely in the isolation box except ART kept a part of its consciousness in there with me and we watched the last episode of Timestream Defenders Orion.

After it was over, ART said, That was satisfyingly unrealistic. Almost deliberately so.

I said, I don’t know how they could have managed it accidentally. I’d had time to process everything, and there were parts I didn’t want to talk about yet. (No, I am not talking about Timestream Defenders Orion.) But this part I could say. You and Amena were right, 2.0 was a person. It wasn’t like a baby, but it was a person.

ART reran a section of Timestream Defenders Orion where all the characters got shrunken to 1/25 of their original size. I’ve never had a module on physics, but I don’t think that would work. It was fun to watch, though. ART said, Do you regret my decision to deploy?

No, I told it. I thought without 2.0, ART and I would have ended up connected to targetContact and the humans would be speaking Pre-CR languages and trying to off each other for not believing in the alien hivemind.

ART reran another one of its favorite scenes, this one involving time travel. I said, You told your humans about me.

ART knew exactly what I meant. I told them I helped an escaping SecUnit get to RaviHyral. I didn’t tell them about Tlacey and her employees in the shuttle.

So you lied to them and made me sound … I didn’t know how to put it. Sound like the person Tapan, Maro, and Rami thought I was, and not like what I actually was. You made me sound safe.

My humans are not members of a survey team from a non-corporate polity who have only recently begun to understand how dangerous corporates can be. Our missions are always calculated risks, and my humans must take steps to defend themselves, and occasionally me.

Then it said, I have completed the removal of the contaminated code and started the process to return your consciousness to your body. While that completes, I have a proposal.

I thought it meant that it wanted to watch all of World Hoppers again. Or that it had found a new series. Instead, it said, There is an upcoming mission under discussion where your help would be invaluable.

Uh. I said the first thing that occurred to me, which was I don’t think your humans are going to like that.

I will discuss it with them.

I didn’t say anything. I didn’t even make a crack about ART’s idea of a discussion and forcing everybody else to do what it wanted.

I didn’t know if I trusted ART’s humans or if I even wanted to try. But no one had ever rescued me before except Dr. Mensah, when she went into the DeltFall habitat after me, and ART had been willing to wipe a colony off a planet for me, and watching the security vid of a group of humans strategizing how best to get me out of there was … a lot, for me, considering the whole reason for me/constructs being created was so I/we could be abandoned in an emergency.

ART said, I know you have difficulty making decisions so you don’t need to give your answer right away.

I do not have difficulty making decisions, ART, you’re full of— I said, but it had already dropped me back in my body. And of course, my performance reliability crashed immediately and I had a forced shutdown.