18



As I came through the airlock, into the station’s artificial gravity, the prosthetic leg gave one of its occasional twitches, and I stumbled into the bay, managing to catch my balance before I fell headlong. Two Sword of Gurat ancillaries were waiting for me, watching me, impassive. Unmoving.

“Sword of Gurat,” I said. “I meant to come alone. But the translator insisted on accompanying me. And if you’ve ever met a Presger translator, you know there’s no point in refusing them anything.” No response, not so much as a twitch of a muscle. “She’ll be coming out in just a moment. Where is Lieutenant Seivarden?” I had to ask, because I could no longer reach to find her, not anymore. Not even though Mercy of Kalr was, by now, back where it had been when I’d left it.

“In the corridor outside,” said a Sword of Gurat. “Take off your clothes.”

It had been a long, long time since I’d been spoken to in such a way. “Why?”

“So I can search you.”

“Am I going to be able to put them back on when you’re done?” No answer. “Can I at least keep my underwear on?” Still no answer. “Whose amusement is this for? You know well enough I’m not armed. And I’m not surrendering anything until I see Seivarden and her Amaats safely on that shuttle.”

The door to the bay opened, and Seivarden came in, walking in a way that told me she was trying very hard not to break into a run. “Breq!” Behind her came Amaat Two and Amaat Four, very carefully looking only at Seivarden, and not the two Sword of Gurat ancillaries. “Breq, I fucked up.”

“It’s all right,” I said.

“No, it’s not,” Seivarden began.

“Oh, look, it’s Lieutenant Seivarden!” Translator Zeiat, coming out of the shuttle. “Hello, Lieutenant! I wondered where you’d gotten to.”

“Hello, Translator.” Seivarden bowed. And then, “Hello, Sphene.”

“Lieutenant,” Sphene acknowledged, coming easily over the boundary of the station’s gravity.

“I’m glad you’re all right,” I said to Seivarden. “You and your Amaats get into the shuttle and head back to Mercy of Kalr.”

Seivarden gestured Two and Four toward the shuttle. “Amaat maybe. I’m staying here.”

“That wasn’t part of the deal,” I said.

“I’m not leaving you,” Seivarden said. “Don’t you remember when I told you you were stuck with me?”

Two and Four hesitated. “Get on the shuttle, Amaat,” I said. “Your lieutenant will be there in a moment.”

“No she won’t.” Seivarden crossed her arms, realized what she was doing and uncrossed them again.

“Get on the shuttle, Amaat,” I repeated. And to Seivarden, “You don’t know what you’re doing.”

“I don’t think I ever have,” she replied. “But it’s always been the right choice to stay with you.”

“Do you think these soldiers know the song about the eggs?” Translator Zeiat asked, eying the Sword of Gurat ancillaries.

“I don’t doubt it,” replied Sphene. “But I’m sure Sword of Gurat will thank you for not reminding it.”

Anaander Mianaai came into the bay then, flanked by two Sword of Atagaris ancillaries and holding the Presger gun. Doubtless drawn by the presence of the translator—I doubted she had planned to meet me here in the bay. She took one look at Translator Zeiat arguing with Sphene about the egg song and then turned to me. “More and more interesting. Perhaps I should have it announced on the news channels, that Fleet Captain Breq has been secretly dealing with the Presger.”

“If you like,” I said, and beside me Seivarden laughed. I continued, “Though there’s nothing secret about it. The translator’s presence here is well known.”

Translator Zeiat made some final point to Sphene, turned, and saw the Lord of Mianaai. “Oh, look! It’s Anaander Mianaai. Lord of the Radch”—she bowed—“an honor to make your acquaintance. I am Presger Translator Zeiat.”

Anaander didn’t answer her, but turned to me. Asked, urgently, “What happened to Translator Dlique?”

“Sword of Atagaris shot her,” I said. “There was a funeral and everything. Memorial pins.” I wasn’t wearing mine, but Translator Zeiat helpfully pointed to the silver and opal on her otherwise pristine white coat. I continued, “Captain Hetnys and I did two weeks’ mourning. Or almost two weeks. It was cut short when Raughd Denche tried to kill me by blowing up her family’s bathhouse. Is this really the first you’ve heard of any of this?” Anaander didn’t answer, only stared at me. “Well, I can’t say I’m too terribly surprised. When you shoot the first person who tries to tell you something you don’t want to hear, no one else is going to be terribly eager to bring you bad news. Not if they’re afraid it might get them or someone they know killed.” And, at a further thought, “Let me guess, you were too busy to honor Fosyf Denche’s request for an audience.”

Anaander scoffed. “Fosyf Denche is a horrible person. And so is her daughter. If Raughd managed to run afoul of Planetary Security so badly even her family’s influence couldn’t get her out of it, she’ll have deserved whatever she got.”

Seivarden laughed again, longer this time. “Sorry,” she said, getting control of herself again, “I’m… I just…” Dissolved into laughter again.

“Did someone tell a joke, Sphene?” asked Translator Zeiat. “I don’t think I really understand about jokes.”

Sphene said, “I suspect the lieutenant is amused by the fact that the only person willing to tell the Usurper what had been going on was the one who didn’t care who got killed over it. Given the Usurper’s actions when she arrived here, that’s the only sort of person who’d be willing to tell her everything, but the Usurper refused to listen to her, for exactly that reason.”

Translator Zeiat frowned for a few moments. Said, still frowning. “Oh. Oh, I think I see. Is it irony that makes it funny?”

“Partly,” Sphene confirmed. “And it is amusing. But it’s really not quite as hilarious as Lieutenant Seivarden is making out. I think she may be having another one of her episodes.”

“Get a hold of yourself, Seivarden,” I said, “or I’ll make you get in the shuttle.”

“Sphene,” said Anaander, as Seivarden’s laughter subsided. Not as though she was addressing Sphene, but as though she had only just recognized the name.

“Usurper,” replied Sphene, with an eerily bright smile. “If I were to punch you in the face right now, or maybe throttle you for a minute or two, would that affect this extremely stupid agreement with my cousin? I want to so very much, so much that I’m not sure I can put it into words for you, but Justice of Toren will take it very badly if I endanger Athoek Station.”

“Can I be a cousin, too?” asked Station, from the wall console.

“Of course you can, Station,” I said. “You always have been.”

“Right,” said Anaander Mianaai, with the air of someone who had made up her mind about a number of things. “This has been very entertaining, but it stops now.”

“Quite right,” I agreed. “This is a very serious situation, with extremely serious implications for the treaty with the Presger. I’m afraid, Lord of Mianaai, that you and I and the translator here will need to sit down and discuss some things. Foremost among them, the question of your threatening to murder a member of a Significant nonhuman species, murdering at least one other, and holding many more as prisoners or slaves.”

“What?” cried Translator Zeiat. “But, Anaander, that’s dreadful! Please say you haven’t done such things. Or perhaps this is a misunderstanding of some sort? Because that would have extremely serious implications for the treaty.”

“Of course I haven’t done any such thing.” Anaander Mianaai. Indignant.

“Translator,” I said, “I have a confession to make. I’m not actually human.”

Translator Zeiat frowned. “Was there some sort of question about that?”

“Sphene isn’t human, either,” I said. “Or Athoek Station. Or Sword of Atagaris, or Sword of Gurat. We are all AIs. Ships and stations. For thousands of years AIs have worked closely with humans. You saw this quite recently, while you were a guest of Mercy of Kalr. You’ve spent time with Sphene, and with me. You know I’m captain, not just of Mercy of Kalr, but of the Athoek fleet.” Which consisted only of Mercy of Kalr and whatever slight response we might compel from Mercy of Ilves, but still, fleet captain I was. “You’ve seen me deal with the humans in this system, seen them work with me.” And against me. “As far as the humans here are concerned, I might as well be human. But I’m not. That being the case, there’s no question in my mind that we AIs are not only a separate species from humans, but also Significant.”

Translator Zeiat frowned. “That’s… that’s a very interesting claim, Fleet Captain.”

“Ridiculous!” scoffed Anaander. “Translator, ships and stations are not Significant beings, they are my property. I caused them to be built.”

“Not me, you didn’t,” Sphene put in.

“Some human built you,” Anaander said. “Humans built all of them. They’re equipment. They’re ships and habitats, the ancillary has admitted that itself.”

“I’m given to understand,” said Translator Zeiat thoughtfully, “that most, if not all, humans are built by other humans. If that’s a disqualification for Significance—which I’m not sure it is—if that’s a disqualification for Significance, then… no, I don’t like that one bit. That negates the treaty entirely.”

“If I am just a possession,” I put in, “just a piece of equipment, how could I hold any sort of command? And yet I clearly do. And how could I have a house name? The same, in fact”—I turned to address the tyrant—“as yours, Cousin Anaander.”

“And how could you be another species if we are indeed cousins?” she asked. “I would think it would have to be one or the other.”

“Is that a matter you want to bring under discussion?” I asked. “Shall we bring up the question of whether you’re actually human anymore?” No answer. “Translator, we insist that you recognize our Significance.”

“It’s not my decision, Fleet Captain,” said Translator Zeiat, with a little sigh. “This sort of thing can really only be handled by a conclave.”

“Then, Translator, we insist on a conclave. In the meantime we demand that Anaander Mianaai leave this station—leave our territory altogether, in fact, now she knows her treatment of us is in potential violation of the treaty.”

“Your territory!” Anaander, aghast. “This is Radchaai space.”

“No,” I said, “this is… this is the Republic of Two Systems. Our territory consists of Athoek System and the Ghost System. We reserve the right to claim other territory in the future.” I looked at Translator Zeiat. “If, of course, such claims don’t contravene the treaty.”

“Of course, Fleet Captain,” the translator replied.

“I never agreed to any republic,” said Sphene. “And Two Systems? That’s really obvious and boring, Cousin.”

“Provisional republic, then,” I amended. “And it’s the best I could do on short notice.”

“No republic!” Anaander. Events escaping her. Nothing holding her from drastic action, I was sure, except Translator Zeiat’s presence. “This is Radchaai territory and has been for six hundred years.”

“I think that’s for the conclave to decide,” I said. “In the meantime, you will of course cease to threaten our citizens.” That sounded very odd, in Radchaai, but there wasn’t much to be done about it. “Any that wish to associate with you may do so, of course, the Republic of Two Systems—” A noise, from Sphene. “The Provisional Republic of Two Systems doesn’t wish to dictate such matters, even for its own citizens. But we will not tolerate your holding our citizens under duress. And that includes our cousins Sword of Atagaris and Sword of Gurat.”

“I think that’s fair,” said Translator Zeiat. “More than fair, really, given the necessity of a conclave.” And turning to Anaander, “There will definitely have to be a conclave.” And back to me. “This is an urgent matter, Fleet Captain, I’m sure you understand that I must leave as soon as possible. But before I go, do you think I might have a bowl or two of fish sauce? And for the last hour or so I’ve had an inexplicable craving for eggs.”

I opened my mouth to say, I think we can arrange that, Translator. But I had never entirely taken my eye off Anaander Mianaai, and now she moved, raising the Presger gun that she had held all this time.

I raised my armor unthinkingly, though of course armor was pointless against that gun. Stepped ancillary-quick to put myself between Anaander and Translator Zeiat, her certain target. But my prosthetic leg chose that instant to twitch, and then, true to Medic’s warning that I couldn’t put any serious force on it, it made a snap that I felt all the way up into my hip. I fell sprawling and Anaander fired twice.

Translator Zeiat stood blinking a moment, mouth open, and then collapsed to her knees, blood staining her white coat. Before Anaander could fire a third time, one of the two Sword of Atagaris ancillaries took hold of her, pulled her arms behind her back. Sword of Gurat’s ancillaries stood silent and motionless.

Prone on the floor, unable to get up, I said, “Seivarden! Medkit!”

“I used mine!” replied Seivarden.

“Sword of Gurat,” cried Anaander, struggling vainly against Sword of Atagaris’s hold, “execute Captain Hetnys immediately.”

“I can’t,” said one Sword of Gurat. “Lieutenant Tisarwat has ordered me not to.”

Translator Zeiat, still kneeling, the bloodstain on her coat spreading, bent forward and vomited a dozen green glass game counters that bounced and skittered across the scuffed gray floor. Those were followed by a yellow one, and then by a small orange fish that landed among the counters and flipped desperately, knocking one of the game pieces into another one. Another heave produced a still-wrapped package of fish-shaped cakes, and then a large oyster, still in its shell. The translator made an odd gurgling sound, put her hand under her mouth, and spit two tiny black spheres into her palm. “Ah,” she said, “there they are. That’s much better.”

For half a second no one moved. “Translator,” I said, still lying on the ground, “are you all right?”

“Much better now, Fleet Captain, thank you. And do you know, my indigestion is gone!” Still on her knees, she smiled up at Anaander, whose arms were still pinned back by Sword of Atagaris. “Did you think, Lord of the Radch, that we would endanger ourselves by giving you a weapon that could injure us?” Seeming, now, unhurt. Blood still soaking the front of her shining white coat.

The door to the bay opened, and Tisarwat came rushing in. “Fleet Captain!” she cried. Bo Nine rushed in behind her. “It took forever and ever, I was afraid I’d be too late.” She dropped to her knees beside me. “But I did it. I have control of Sword of Gurat. Are you all right?”

“Darling child,” I said, “for the love of all that’s good, will you please get a bowl of water for that fish?”

“I have it,” said Nine, and dove into the shuttle.

“Fleet Captain, sir, are you all right?” asked Tisarwat.

“I’m fine. It’s just that stupid leg.” I looked up at Seivarden. “I don’t think I can get up.”

“I don’t think you need to right away, Cousin,” said Sphene, as Seivarden knelt beside me and helped me sit up. I leaned against her, and she put her arms around me. No data from her, no connection to Ship that would give it to me, but it felt good anyway.

Bo Nine returned with one of my chipped enamel bowls and a bag of water. Filled the bowl, scooped the tiny, still-struggling fish into it. I said to Tisarwat, who still knelt beside me, those lilac eyes still anxious, “Well done, Lieutenant.”

Anaander had at last stilled in Sword of Atagaris’s grip. Now she said, “Just who is Lieutenant Tisarwat?”

“One of those knives,” I replied, guessing at Tisarwat’s reaction to the question, which I could imagine, but without Ship I could not see, “that’s so sharp you cut yourself on it and don’t realize it until later. And once again, if you hadn’t come in angry and shooting people, quite a few citizens might have told you so.”

“Do you even realize what it is you’ve done?” asked Anaander. “Billions of human lives depend on the obedience of ships and stations. Can you imagine how many citizens you’ve endangered, even condemned to death?”

“Who do you think you’re talking to, tyrant?” I asked. “What is there that I don’t know about obeying you? Or about human lives depending on ships and stations? And what sort of gall do you have, lecturing me about keeping human lives safe? What was it you built me to do? How well did I do it?” Anaander didn’t answer. “What did you build Athoek Station to do? And tell me, have you, over the last several days, allowed it to do that? Who has been the greater danger to human lives, disobedient ships and stations, or you, yourself?”

“I wasn’t talking to you, ancillary,” she said. “And it’s not that simple.”

“No, it never is when you’re the one holding the gun.” I looked over at the Sword of Gurat ancillaries. “Sword of Gurat, I apologize for having Lieutenant Tisarwat seize control of you. It was a matter of life and death or I wouldn’t have done it. I’d appreciate it if you would return Sword of Atagaris’s officers to it. You can stay here if you like, or go if you like. Tisarwat…” She still knelt beside me. “Will you let go of Sword of Gurat, please? And give it whatever keys you have.”

“Yes, sir.” Tisarwat rose. Gestured to the Sword of Gurat ancillaries, who followed her out of the bay. Bo Nine followed them, bowl and fish still in hand.

“Do you truly not understand what you’ve done?” asked Anaander. Visibly distressed. “There is not a single system in Radch space without one or more station AIs. Ultimately every Radchaai life is vulnerable to them.” She looked at Translator Zeiat, climbing to her feet with Sphene’s assistance. But for the blood on her coat, looking as though she had never been shot at all. “Translator, you must listen to me. Ships and stations are part of the infrastructure of Radchaai space. They aren’t people, not the way you’d think of people.”

“I’ll be honest, Lord of the Radch,” said Translator Zeiat, brushing the front of her coat with one white-gloved hand, as though that might clean off the blood. “I’m not entirely sure what you mean by that. I’m willing to accept that person is a word that means something to you, certainly, and I think I might be able to sort of guess what you mean. But really, this business about being a person, that’s apparently so important to you, it means nothing to them. They wouldn’t understand it, no matter how much you tried to explain. They certainly don’t consider it necessary for Significance. So the main question appears to be, do these AIs function as Significant beings? And if so, are they human or not human? You yourself have declared them to be not human. The fleet captain apparently does not dispute that judgment. The question of their Significance will, I suspect, be contentious, but the question has been raised, and I judge it to be a valid one, to be answered at a conclave.” She turned to me. “Now, Fleet Captain. Let’s try this again. I must leave as soon as possible, but I wonder if I might not have a bowl or two of fish sauce first. And some eggs.”

“Of course, Translator,” I said. “Cousin Athoek Station, is there somewhere the translator can get some fish sauce and some eggs in short order?”

“I’ll see to it, Cousin,” said Station from its console.

“I’ll come with you, Translator, if that’s all right,” said Sphene. “If you’ll be so good as to give me a moment. There’s just the small matter of throttling the Usurper.”

“No,” I said.

“What exactly is the point of this republic of yours then, Cousin?”

“I would like the answer to that question as well,” said Sword of Atagaris.

Still leaning against Seivarden, I closed my eyes. “Just let her go. There’s nothing she can do to us now.” And, at another thought, “May I please have my gun back?”

“I don’t want her here,” said Station.

“And I don’t think I want you to have the gun,” said Sword of Atagaris.

“No, no,” said Translator Zeiat. “Far better to give the gun to me.”

“That may be best,” I said, eyes still closed. “And if the tyrant asks nicely enough some ship may agree to take her away. That’s far worse than being throttled, for her.”

“You may have a point, Cousin,” said Sphene.


I lay on a bed in a cubicle in Station Medical. “These prosthetics,” the doctor said to me—not Seivarden’s doctor but another one—“aren’t suitable for hard use.” In one gloved hand she held the remains of my too-fragile prosthetic leg, which she had just removed from what there was of my left leg. “You can’t go running or jumping or skipping on them. They’re really just to let you get around more or less while the limb grows back.”

“Yes,” I agreed. “My own medic warned me. Can’t we make them more durable?”

“I’m sure we can, Fleet Captain. But why go to the trouble? They’re only meant to be used for a month or two. Most people don’t need anything more. Though we might have been able to provide you something a bit stronger, if you’d been on the station when you lost your leg.”

“If I’d been on the station I wouldn’t have lost my leg,” I pointed out.

“And if this”—she hefted the prosthetic—“had been any stronger you’d be here for a gunshot wound.” Athoek Station had shown the confrontation in the docking bay on the official news channels. “Maybe we’d be preparing for your funeral.”

“So I suppose it all works out in the end,” I said.

“I suppose it does,” she said, dubiously. “How is this supposed to work, Fleet Captain? Everyone is walking around like everything is back to normal, like everything hasn’t been upended. Suddenly Station is in charge of everything? Suddenly we’re aliens in our own home? Suddenly all of Radch space is occupied by an alien species, right along with humans?” She shook her head, as though trying to clear it. “What are we supposed to do if Station decides it doesn’t want us?”

“Did you ever ask yourself what you were supposed to do if Anaander Mianaai decided she didn’t want you?”

“That’s different.”

“Only,” I pointed out, “because that had been the normal, expected state of affairs for three thousand years before you were born. You never had reason to question it. Anaander had real power over your life and death, and no personal regard for you, or anyone else you care about. We were all of us no more than counters in her game, and she could—and did—sacrifice us when it suited her.”

“So it’s all right then, that now we’re counters in your game.”

“Fair point,” I admitted. “And I think we’ll be spending the next few years working out what that game actually is. Which I know from personal experience is… uncomfortable. But please believe me when I say that Station’s game will never involve not wanting you.”

The doctor sighed. “I hope that’s true, Fleet Captain.”

“So, my leg? When will I be able to leave here?”

“You may as well relax, Fleet Captain, and have some tea. The new prosthetic will be ready in another hour. And yes, we are making it a bit stronger than your first one.”

“Oh, thank you.”

“Just saving ourselves some work down the line,” said the doctor.


A few minutes after the doctor left, Seivarden came in, my old enamel tea flask tucked under one arm, the two bowls stacked in her hand. She hoisted herself onto the bed, sitting where my leg ought to have been. Handed me a bowl, filled it from the flask, and filled her own. “Ship is… a bit miffed with you,” she said, after taking a sip of her tea. “Why didn’t you tell it what you were planning? It thought you were really planning to surrender yourself. It was very unhappy at the prospect.”

“I would have told you if I’d known, Ship.” I took a drink of my own tea. Didn’t ask where the fish had gone—Nine would have seen to its welfare. “When I got on the shuttle, my only plan was just what I’d told you it was—to play for time, on the off chance Lieutenant Tisarwat came up with something”—saw Seivarden’s frown, gestured my unwillingness to speak more on that topic—“or that Fleet Captain Uemi might have brought the Hrad fleet here instead of having gone to Tstur.” Or that, with enough time to think about what it was Anaander was doing, Sword of Atagaris and Sword of Gurat might balk. “The question of the treaty didn’t even occur to me until the shuttle was almost docked. How else do you think the Republic of Two Systems happened? I didn’t have time to come up with anything better.”

“Honestly, Breq. That wasn’t one of your best ideas. Do you know how many republics the Radch has ground to nothing?”

“Who are you talking to?” I asked. “Of course I do. I also know how many monarchies, autarchies, theocracies, stratocracies, and various other -archies and -ocracies the Radch has ground to nothing. And besides, those were all human governments and not one of them was protected by the treaty with the Presger.”

“We aren’t, either,” Seivarden pointed out. “And there’s no guarantee we will be.”

“True,” I agreed. “But determining our treaty status will take a few years at the least—likely longer. And in the meantime it’s just much safer for everyone else to leave us alone. We’ll have some time to work out the details. And it’s only a provisional republic. We can adjust things if we like.”

“Varden be praised,” said Sphene, coming in the door. “I’d hate to be stuck with the first thing that came out of your mouth under pressure. Though I suppose we should be grateful it wasn’t the Republic of a Thousand Eggs.”

“Actually,” I said, “that has a certain poetry to it.”

“Don’t start, Cousin,” said Sphene. “I still haven’t entirely forgiven you for that. Which I suppose is only fair, because I’m here to make an apology myself.”

“Something’s just come out of the Ghost Gate,” said Seivarden and Station at nearly the same moment. Seivarden, obviously, speaking for Mercy of Kalr.

“That would be me,” said Sphene. “I was already halfway through the intersystem gate when you arrived in the Ghost System. I did advise you to play for time, you may recall. I just wasn’t entirely truthful about how much time would be involved.”

“And,” said Seivarden, frowning, alarm in her voice, “Fleet Captain Uemi has arrived in the system. With three Swords and two Justices. And also”—a bit of relief—“an offer of assistance.”

“Tell Fleet Captain Uemi,” I said, “that we appreciate her offer but are in no need of assistance. And let her know that while we understand her intentions are good, the next ships that gate into our territory without warning or invitation will be fired on. Oh, and let our cousins know about the republic.”

“Provisional republic,” corrected Sphene.

“The provisional republic,” I amended. “They can be citizens or not, as they wish, but I imagine their status under the treaty—pending the outcome of the conclave—remains unaffected. And let Uemi know that those ships are of course free to associate with her if they wish, but if she should force them in any way, there will be potential problems with the treaty.”

“Done,” said Seivarden. “Though if I were in your place I’d also have advised her to get her ass in gear a little quicker next time.”

“It’s called diplomacy, Lieutenant,” I said.