4



As I said, space is big. When the Presger courier came out of the Ghost Gate—shortly afterward sending a message identifying itself as a Presger ship, citing a subsection of the treaty and asking, on the basis of that, for permission to dock at Athoek Station—we had a good three days to prepare for its arrival. Time enough for Lieutenant Tisarwat to become at least outwardly resigned to the fact that Undergarden residents wanted to direct their own affairs.

Time enough for me to meet with Basnaaid Elming. Who had only recently learned that I had killed her sister. Whose life I had saved, days before. Of course, I was the reason her life had been in danger in the first place. She had, unaccountably, decided to continue to speak to me. I didn’t question it, or consider too closely the profound ambivalence that almost certainly lay behind her courtesy. “Thank you for the tea,” she said, sitting on a crate at the corridor-end. Tisarwat was out, drinking with friends. Sphene was wherever Sphene went when it grew tired of sitting in the corner and staring. Station would tell me if it got itself into trouble.

“Thank you for coming to see me,” I replied. “I know you’re busy.” Basnaaid was one of the horticulturists in charge of the Gardens, five acres of open space full of water and trees and flowers. The Gardens were currently closed to the public while the support structures that kept the lake from collapsing into the Undergarden were being repaired—they had needed work for quite some time, but had chosen an inconvenient moment to fail, just days ago. Now the beautiful Gardens were a mess of mud, and plants that might or might not recover from that eventful day.

Basnaaid replied with a small quirk of a smile that reminded me strongly of her sister, and that also told me that she was quite tired but trying to be polite. “They’re making good progress, the lake should be able to be filled again in a few days, they say. I’m holding out hope for one or two of the roses.” She gestured resignation. “It’ll be a while before the Gardens are back to what they were.” At least the repairs to the lake necessitated repairs to the first level of the Undergarden, directly beneath it, limiting Eminence Ifian’s ability to block the Undergarden refit. And then, because she’d clearly been thinking along the same lines, Basnaaid added, “I don’t understand this business about maybe delaying the refit of the Undergarden.” The official word, in the authorized news feeds, was still that returning displaced citizens to their homes was a priority. But rumor didn’t run along the authorized channels. “And I don’t understand what Eminence Ifian is thinking, either.” The head priest of Amaat had taken that morning’s omen-casting as an opportunity to warn station residents about the danger of acting too hastily and finding oneself in a situation that would, as a result, be difficult to remedy. How much better to consult the desire of God, and ponder where true justice, propriety, and benefit might lie. The implication was clear to anyone who’d been paying attention to the current gossip. Which was to say, everyone on the station except very small children.

Possibly quite a few of the people Eminence Ifian knew and socialized with would be sympathetic to her point. Possibly she had made sure of support in particular quarters before making her speech that morning. But the people who were sleeping in shifts, three or four to a bunk (or who had, like me, refused to do so and were sleeping in corners and corridors), were numerous and unhappy. Any delay in getting Undergarden residents back into their own beds was, to put it mildly, unappealing to those citizens. But of course, they were mostly the least significant of Station’s residents, people with menial, low-status work assignments, or without much family to support them, or without patrons sufficiently well-off to assist them. “Clearly Eminence Ifian is thinking that if she can marshal the support of enough people, Station Administrator Celar can be pressured to change the plans for the Undergarden refit. And she means to take advantage of the fact that the station administrator didn’t stop to have a cast done before she gave orders to go ahead.”

“But this isn’t really about Station Administrator Celar, or even the Undergarden, is it?” Basnaaid’s position as Horticulturist didn’t, in theory, involve much politics. In theory. “This is aimed at you, Fleet Captain. She wants to lessen your influence on Station Administration, and she probably wouldn’t mind if all the Undergarden residents were shipped downwell, either.”

“She didn’t care whether they were here or not before,” I pointed out.

“You weren’t here before. And I suppose it isn’t just Eminence Ifian wondering what you plan to do once you’ve taken charge of the dregs of Athoek Station, and thinking it might be best if you never get a chance to answer that question.”

“Your sister would have understood.”

She smiled that tired half-smile again. “Yes. But why now? Not you, I mean, but the eminence. This is hardly the time for political games, with the station overcrowded, with ships trapped in the system, intersystem gates destroyed or closed by order, and nobody really knowing why any of it is happening.” Basnaaid knew, by now. But System Governor Giarod had refused to even consider releasing the information generally, that Anaander Mianaai, lord of Radchaai space for three thousand years, was divided, at war against herself. Judging from the official feeds coming through Athoek’s still-working (but ordered closed to traffic) gates, the governors of neighboring systems had made similar decisions.

“On the contrary,” I replied, with my own small smile. “It’s the perfect time for such games, if all you care about is your side winning. And I don’t doubt that Eminence Ifian is thinking that I support… a political opponent of hers. She is mistaken, of course. I have my own agenda, unrelated to that person’s.” I saw little difference between any of the parts of Anaander Mianaai. “Faulty assumptions lead to faulty action.” It was a particular problem for that faction of Anaander I was now sure Eminence Ifian supported—unable or unwilling to admit that the problem lay within herself, that part of Anaander had put it about to her supporters that her split with herself was due to outside interference. Specifically interference by the alien Presger.

“Well. I don’t appreciate her trying to delay people getting back to their homes. If the families originally assigned there wanted to go back to the Undergarden so badly, they could have pressed for a refit long ago.”

“Indeed,” I acknowledged. “And no doubt quite a few other people feel the same way.”


And there was time enough for Seivarden and Ekalu, still on Mercy of Kalr, to have an argument.

They lay together in Seivarden’s bunk—pressed close, the space was narrow. Ekalu angry—and terrified, heart rate elevated. Seivarden, between Ekalu and the wall, momentarily immobile with injured bewilderment. “It was a compliment!” Seivarden insisted.

“The way provincial is an insult. Except what am I?” Seivarden, still shocked, didn’t answer. “Every time you use that word, provincial, every time you make some remark about someone’s low-class accent or unsophisticated vocabulary, you remind me that I’m provincial, that I’m low-class. That my accent and my vocabulary are hard work for me. When you laugh at your Amaats for rinsing their tea leaves you just remind me that cheap bricked tea tastes like home. And when you say things meant to compliment me, to tell me I’m not like any of that, it just reminds me that I don’t belong here. And it’s always something small but it’s every day.”

Seivarden would have pulled back, but she was already firmly against the wall, and Ekalu had no room to move away herself, not without getting out of bed entirely. “You never said anything about this before.” Because she was who she was, the daughter of an old and once nearly unthinkably prestigious house, born a thousand years before Ekalu or anyone on the ship but me, even her indignant disbelief sounded effortlessly aristocratic. “If it’s so terrible why haven’t you said anything until now?”

“How am I supposed to tell you how I feel?” Ekalu demanded. “How can I complain? You outrank me. You and the fleet captain are close. What chance do I have, if I complain? And then where can I go? I can’t even go back to Amaat Decade, I don’t belong there anymore, either. I can’t go home, even if I could get a travel permit. What am I supposed to do?”

Truly angry and hurt now, Seivarden levered herself up on her elbow. “That bad, is it? And I’m such a terrible person for complimenting you, for liking you. For…” She gestured, indicating the rumpled bed, the two of them, naked.

Ekalu shifted, sat up. Put her feet on the floor. “You aren’t listening.”

“Oh, I’m listening.”

“No,” replied Ekalu, and stood, and picked her uniform trousers up from off a chair. “You’re doing exactly what I was afraid you’d do.”

Seivarden opened her mouth to say something angry and bitter. Ship said, in her ear, “Lieutenant. Please don’t.”

It seemed not to have any immediate effect, so silently I said, “Seivarden.”

“But…,” began Seivarden, whether in reply to Ship, or to me, or to Ekalu I couldn’t tell.

“I have work to do,” said Ekalu, her voice even despite her hurt and dread and anger. She pulled on her gloves, picked up her shirt and jacket and boots, and went out the door.

Seivarden was sitting all the way up by now. “Aatr’s fucking tits!” she cried, and swung a bare fist at the wall beside her. And cried out again, in physical pain this time—her fist was unarmored, and the wall was hard.

“Lieutenant,” said Ship in her ear, “you should go to Medical.”

“It’s broken,” Seivarden said, when she could speak again. Hunching over her injured hand. “Isn’t it. I even know which fucking bone it is.”

“Two, actually,” replied Mercy of Kalr. “The fourth and the fifth metacarpals. Have you done this before?” The door opened, and Amaat Seven entered, her face ancillary-expressionless. She picked Seivarden’s uniform up off the chair.

“Once,” replied Seivarden. “It was a while ago.”

“The last time you tried to quit kef?” Ship guessed. Fortunately only in Seivarden’s ear, where Amaat Seven couldn’t hear it. The crew knew part of Seivarden’s history—that she had been wealthy and privileged, and had been captain of her own ship until that ship was destroyed and she’d spent a thousand years in a suspension pod. What they did not know was that, on waking, she’d discovered her house gone, herself impoverished and insignificant, nothing left to her but her aristocratic looks and accent. She had fled Radch space and become addicted to kef. I had found her on a backwater planet, naked, bleeding, half-dead. She hadn’t taken kef since then.

If Seivarden’s hand hadn’t been broken she’d probably have swung again. The impulse to do it moved muscles in her arm and hand, and produced a fresh jolt of pain. Her eyes filled with tears.

Amaat Seven shook out Seivarden’s uniform trousers. “Sir,” she said, still impassive.

“If you’re having this much trouble coping with your emotions,” said Ship, still silently in Seivarden’s ear, “then I really think you need to talk to Medic about it.”

“Fuck you,” Seivarden said, but she let Amaat Seven dress her, and escort her to Medical. Where she let Medic put a corrective on her hand, but said nothing at all about the argument with Lieutenant Ekalu, or her emotional distress, or her addiction to kef.


There was also time for an exchange of messages between myself and Fleet Captain Uemi, one gate away, in neighboring Hrad System. “My compliments to Fleet Captain Breq,” messaged Fleet Captain Uemi, “and I would be happy to pass your reports on to Omaugh Palace.” A gentle, diplomatic reminder that I had sent no such reports, not even notice that I had arrived at Athoek. Uemi also sent me news—Omaugh Anaander was sure enough of her hold on Omaugh Palace that she had begun to send more ships to other systems in the province. There was talk of allowing traffic in the province’s intersystem gates, but personally, Uemi said, she didn’t think it was quite safe yet.

The provincial palaces farthest from Omaugh (where this conflict had broken into the open) had gone silent weeks ago, and remained so. There had been no word out of Tstur Palace since it had fallen. The governors of Tstur Province’s outlying systems were near panic—their systems, particularly the ones without habitable planets, were in dire need of resources that were no longer coming through the intersystem gates. They might very naturally have asked neighboring systems for help, but those neighbors were in Omaugh Province, where rumor said a different Anaander was in charge. Rumor also said that governors of systems closer to Tstur Palace who had been deemed insufficiently loyal to Tstur had been executed.

And all this time, the official news feeds went on as they always had, a steady parade of local events, discussions of inconsequential local gossip, recordings of public entertainments, punctuated now and then with official reassurance that this inconvenience, this brief disturbance, would be over soon. Was even now being dealt with.

“I fear,” Fleet Captain Uemi sent, at the end of all this, “that some of the more recently annexed systems may try to break away. Shis’urna, particularly, or Valskaay. It’ll be a bloody business if they do. Have you perhaps heard anything?” I had spent time in both systems, had participated in both annexations. And a small population of Valskaayans lived on Athoek, and might well have had an interest in that question. “It really would be better for everyone if they don’t rebel,” Fleet Captain Uemi’s message continued. “I’m sure you know that.”

And I was sure she wanted me to pass that on, to whatever contacts I might have in either of those places. “Graciously thanking Fleet Captain Uemi for her compliments,” I replied, “I am not currently concerned with any system but Athoek. I am sending local intelligence, and my own official reports, with many thanks for the fleet captain’s offer to pass them on to the appropriate authorities.” And bundled that up with a week’s worth of every scrap of official news I could find, including the results of seventy-five regional downwell radish-growing competitions that had been announced just that morning, which I flagged as worthy of special attention. And a month’s worth of my own routine reports and status records, dozens of them, every single line of every single one of them filled out with exactly the same two words: Fuck off.


Next afternoon, Governor Giarod stood beside me at a hatch on the docks. Gray floor and walls, grimier than I liked, but then for most of my life I had been used to a military standard of cleanliness. The system governor seemed calm, but in the time it had taken for the Presger courier to reach Athoek Station from the Ghost Gate, she’d had plenty of opportunity to worry. Was possibly even more worried now that we were only waiting for the pressure to equalize between the station and the Presger ship. Just the two of us, no one else, not even any of my soldiers, though Kalr Five stood outwardly impassive, inwardly fretting, in the corridor outside the bay.

“Have the Presger been in the Ghost System all this while?” It was the third time she had asked that question, in as many days. “Did you ask, what is its name, Sphene, you said?” She frowned. “What sort of name is that? Didn’t Notai ships usually have long names? Like Ineluctable Ascendancy of Mind Unfolding or The Finite Contains the Infinite Contains the Finite?”

Both of those ship names were fictional, characters in more or less famous melodramatic entertainments. “Notai ships were named according to their class,” I said. “Sphene is one of the Gems.” None of them had ever been famous enough to inspire an adventure serial. “And it wouldn’t say what might or might not be with it in the Ghost System.” I had asked, and gotten only a cold stare. “But I don’t think this courier came from there. Or if it did, it was only there in order to access the Ghost Gate.”

“If it hadn’t been for all that… unpleasantness last week, we might have asked Sword of Atagaris.”

“We might,” I replied. “But we would have had good reason not to trust its answer.” The same went for Sphene, actually, but I didn’t point that out.

A moment of silence from Governor Giarod, and then, “Have the Presger broken the treaty?” That was a new question. Likely she had been holding it back all this time.

“Because they must have gated inside human territory, to get to the Ghost System, you mean? I doubt it. They cited the treaty on arrival, you may recall.” This tiny ship didn’t look like it had the capability to make its own intersystem gates, but the Presger had surprised us before.

The hatch clicked, and thunked, and swung open. Governor Giarod stiffened, trying, I supposed, to stand straighter than she already was. The person who came stooping through the open hatchway looked entirely human. Though of course that didn’t mean she necessarily was. She was quite tall—there must have barely been room for her to stretch out in her tiny ship. To look at her, she might have been an ordinary Radchaai. Dark hair, long, tied simply behind her head. Brown skin, dark eyes, all quite unremarkable. She wore the white of the Translators Office—white coat and gloves, white trousers, white boots. Spotless. Crisp and unwrinkled, though in such a small space there could barely have been room for a change of clothes, let alone to dress so carefully. But not a single pin, or any other kind of jewelry, to break that shining white.

She blinked twice, as though adjusting to the light, and looked at me and at Governor Giarod, and frowned just slightly. Governor Giarod bowed, and said, “Translator. Welcome to Athoek Station. I’m System Governor Giarod, and this”—she gestured toward me—“is Fleet Captain Breq.”

The translator’s barely perceptible frown cleared, and she bowed. “Governor. Fleet Captain. Honored and pleased to make your acquaintance. I am Presger Translator Dlique.”

The governor was very good at looking as though she were quite calm. She drew breath to speak, but said nothing. Thinking, no doubt, of Translator Dlique herself, whose corpse was even now in suspension in Medical. Whose death we were going to have to explain.

That explanation was apparently going to be even more difficult than we had thought. But perhaps I could make at least that part of it a bit easier. When I had first met Translator Dlique, and asked her who she was, she had said, I said just now I was Dlique but I might not be, I might be Zeiat. “Begging your very great pardon, Translator,” I said, before Governor Giarod could make a second attempt at speech, “but I believe that you’re actually Presger Translator Zeiat.”

The translator frowned, in earnest this time. “No. No, I don’t think so. They told me I was Dlique. And they don’t make mistakes, you know. When you think they have, it’s just you looking at it wrong. That’s what they say, anyway.” She sighed. “They say all sorts of things. But you say I’m Zeiat, not Dlique. You wouldn’t say that unless you had a reason to.” She seemed just slightly doubtful of this.

“I’m quite certain of it,” I replied.

“Well,” she said, her frown intensifying for just a moment, and then clearing. “Well, if you’re certain. Are you certain?”

“Quite certain, Translator.”

“Let’s start again, then.” She shrugged her shoulders, as though adjusting the set of her spotless, perfect coat, and then bowed again. “Governor, Fleet Captain. Honored to make your acquaintance. I am Presger Translator Zeiat. And this is very awkward, but now I really do need to ask you what’s happened to Translator Dlique.”

I looked at Governor Giarod. She had frozen, for a moment not even breathing. Then she squared her broad shoulders and said, smoothly, as though she had not been on the edge of panic just the moment before, “Translator, we’re so very sorry. We do owe you an explanation, and a very profound apology.”

“She went and got herself killed, didn’t she,” said Translator Zeiat. “Let me guess, she got bored and went somewhere you’d told her not to go.”

“More or less, Translator,” I acknowledged.

Translator Zeiat gave an exasperated sigh. “That would be just like her. I am so glad I’m not Dlique. Did you know she dismembered her sister once? She was bored, she said, and wanted to know what would happen. Well, what did she expect? And her sister’s never been the same.”

“Oh,” said Governor Giarod. Likely all she could manage.

“Translator Dlique mentioned it,” I said.

Translator Zeiat scoffed. “She would.” And then, after a brief pause, “Are you certain it was Dlique? Perhaps there’s been some sort of mistake. Perhaps it was someone else who died.”

“Your very great pardon, Translator,” replied Governor Giarod, “but when she arrived, she introduced herself as Translator Dlique.”

“Well, that’s just the thing,” Translator Zeiat replied. “Dlique is the sort of person who’ll say anything that comes into her mind. Particularly if she thinks it will be interesting or amusing. You really can’t trust her to tell the truth.”

I waited for Governor Giarod to reply, but she seemed paralyzed again. Perhaps from trying to follow Translator Zeiat’s statement to its obvious conclusion.

“Translator,” I said, “are you suggesting that since Translator Dlique isn’t entirely trustworthy, she might have lied to us about being Translator Dlique?”

“Nothing more likely,” replied Zeiat. “You can see why I’d much rather be Zeiat than Dlique. I don’t much like her sense of humor, and I certainly don’t want to encourage her. But I’d much rather be Zeiat than Dlique just now, so I suppose we can just let her have her little bit of fun this time. Is there anything, you know…” She gestured doubt. “Anything left? Of the body, I mean.”

“We put the body in a suspension pod as quickly as we could, Translator,” said Governor Giarod, trying very hard not to look or sound aghast. “And… we didn’t know what… what customs would be appropriate. We held a funeral…”

Translator Zeiat tilted her head and looked very intently at the governor. “That was very obliging of you, Governor.” She said it as though she wasn’t entirely sure it was obliging.

The governor reached into her coat, pulled out a silver-and-opal pin. Held it out to Translator Zeiat. “We had memorials made, of course.”

Translator Zeiat took the pin, examined it. Looked back up at Governor Giarod, at me. “I’ve never had one of these before! And look, it matches yours.” We were both wearing the pins from Translator Dlique’s funeral. “You’re not related to Dlique, are you?”

“We stood in for the translator’s family, at the funeral,” Governor Giarod explained. “For propriety’s sake.”

“Oh, propriety.” As though that explained everything. “Of course. Well, it’s more than I would have done, I’ll tell you. So. That’s all cleared up, then.”

“Translator,” I said, “may one properly inquire as to the purpose of your visit?”

Governor Giarod added, hastily, “We are of course pleased you’ve chosen to honor us.” With a very small glance my way that was as much objection as she could currently make to the directness of my question.

“The purpose of my visit?” asked Zeiat, seeming puzzled for a moment. “Well, now, that’s hard to say. They told me I was Dlique, you recall, and the thing about Dlique is—aside from the fact that you can’t trust a word she says—she’s easily bored and really far too curious. About the most inappropriate things, too. I’m quite sure she came here because she was bored and wanted to see what would happen. But since you tell me I’m Zeiat, I suspect I’m here because that ship is really terribly cramped and I’ve been inside it far too long. I’d really like to be able to walk around and stretch a bit, and perhaps eat some decent food.” A moment of doubt. “You do eat food, don’t you?”

It was the sort of question I could imagine Translator Dlique asking. And perhaps she had asked it, when she’d first arrived, because Governor Giarod replied, calmly, “Yes, Translator.” On, it seemed, firmer ground for the moment. “Would you like to eat something now?”

“Yes, please, Governor!”


Even before the translator arrived, Governor Giarod had wanted to bring Translator Zeiat to the governor’s residence by a back route, through an access tunnel. Before the treaty the Presger had torn apart human ships and Stations—and their inhabitants—for no comprehensible reason. No attempt to fight them, to defend against them, had ever been successful. Until the advent of the Presger translators, no human had managed to communicate with them at all. Humans in close proximity to Presger simply died, often slowly and messily. The treaty had put an end to that, but people were afraid of the Presger, for very good reasons, and since I had insisted that we not conceal Translator Dlique’s death, people would have good reason to worry about the arrival of the Presger now.

I had pointed out that keeping Translator Dlique’s presence a secret had not ended well. That it seemed likely no Presger translator could be successfully concealed or confined in any event, and that while most station residents were no doubt entirely understandably afraid of the Presger, and apprehensive of the translator’s arrival, she herself would likely look passably human and non-threatening, and the sight of her might actually be reassuring. Governor Giarod had finally agreed, and so we took the lift to the main concourse. It was midmorning on the station’s schedule, and plenty of citizens were out, walking, or standing in groups to talk. Just like every day, except for two things: the four rows of priests sitting in front of the entrance to the temple of Amaat—Eminence Ifian in the center of the very first row, sitting right on the dingy ground; and a long, snaking line of citizens that reached from Station Administration to nearly three-quarters of the way down the concourse.

“Well,” I remarked, quietly, to Governor Giarod, who had stopped cold, three steps out of the lift, “you did tell Station that your assistant could handle anything that came up while you were busy with the translator.” Who had stopped when I and the governor had stopped, and was gazing curiously and openly around at the people, the windows on the second level, the huge reliefs of the four Emanations on the façade of the temple of Amaat.

I could guess what Eminence Ifian was up to. A quick, silent query to Station confirmed it. The priests of Amaat were on strike. Ifian had announced that she would not make the day’s cast, because it had become clear that Station Administration didn’t care to listen to the messages Amaat provided. And incidentally, while the priests sat in front of the temple, no contracts of clientage could be made, no births or deaths registered, and no funerals held. I couldn’t help but admire the strategy—technically, most funeral obsequies that traditionally were attended to by a priest of Amaat could also be performed by any citizen; the filing of an actual clientage contract was arguably less important than the relationship itself and could easily enough be left for later; and one could argue that on a station with an AI, no births or deaths could possibly go unnoticed or unrecorded. But these were all things that meant a fair amount to most citizens. It wasn’t a terribly Radchaai form of citizen protest, but the eminence did have the example of the striking field workers downwell. Whom I had spoken in support of, and so I couldn’t openly oppose the priests’ work stoppage without exposing myself as a hypocrite.

As for that long line of citizens outside Station Administration—there weren’t many forms of large-scale protest realistically available to most citizens, but one of them was standing in line when you didn’t actually need to. In theory, of course, no Radchaai on a station like Athoek ever needed to wait in much of a line for anything. One needed only put in a request and receive either an appointment, or a place in the queue, and notification when it was nearly your turn. And it’s much easier for an official to be nonchalant about a list of requests to meet that nine times out of ten can be put off till the next day than to ignore a long line of people actually standing outside her door.

Such lines generally began more or less spontaneously, but once they reached a certain size, decisions to join became more organized. This one was well beyond that threshold. Light-brown-uniformed Security strolled up and down, watching, occasionally exchanging a few words. Just letting everyone know they were there. In theory—again—Security could order everyone to disperse. That would end with the line re-forming first thing tomorrow, and the next day, and the next. Or perhaps a similar line stretching out of Security’s headquarters. It was better to keep things calm, and let the line run its course. So was this line in support of Eminence Ifian’s agenda, or protesting it?

Either way, we would have to walk by both the line and the seated priests to reach the governor’s residence. Governor Giarod was fairly good at not panicking visibly, but, I had discovered, not good at actually not panicking. She looked up at Translator Zeiat. “Translator, what sort of food do you like?”

The translator turned her attention back to us. “I don’t know that I’ve ever had any, Governor.” And then, distracted again, “Why are all those people sitting on the ground over there?”

I was hard-pressed to guess if Governor Giarod was more alarmed by the question about the striking priests, or the assertion that Translator Zeiat had never actually eaten anything. “Your pardon, Translator—you’ve never had food?”

“The translator has only been Zeiat since she stepped out of the shuttle,” I pointed out. “There hasn’t been time. Translator, those priests are sitting down in front of the temple as a protest. They want to pressure Station Administration into changing a policy they don’t like.”

“Really!” She smiled. “I didn’t think you Radchaai did that sort of thing.”

“And I,” I replied, “didn’t think the Presger understood the difference between one sort of human and another.”

“Oh, no, they don’t,” she replied. “I do, though. Or, you know, I understand the idea of it. In the abstract. I don’t actually have a lot of experience at it.”

Governor Giarod, ignoring this, said, “Translator, there’s a very good tea shop over this way.” She gestured aside. “I’m sure they’ll be serving something interesting.”

“Interesting, eh?” said Translator Zeiat. “Interesting is good.” And she and System Governor Giarod headed off across the concourse, not coincidentally away from the temple, and from Station Administration.

I made to follow them, but stopped at a signal from Kalr Five, still behind me. Turned to see Citizen Uran coming toward me across the scuffed white floor. “Fleet Captain,” she said, and bowed.

“Citizen. Shouldn’t you be studying Raswar?”

“My tutor is in line, Fleet Captain.”

Uran’s Raswar tutor was Ychana, and had relatives who lived in the Undergarden. That answered my question about what the line was meant to protest. I considered that a moment. “I haven’t seen any Undergarden residents in line. Not from this distance, anyway.” Of course, it was possible those who were in line had exchanged their very non-Radchaai tunics for more conventionally Radchaai jackets, shirts, and gloves.

“No, Fleet Captain.” Uran’s head dipped downward, just barely, just for an instant. She’d wanted to look down at the ground, away from me, but had resisted the impulse. “There’s a meeting.” She’d switched to Delsig, which she knew I understood. “It’s just starting now.”

“About the line?” I asked, in the same language. She made a tiny gesture of affirmation. “And our household wasn’t invited?” I understood why none of my household had been invited to the last meeting, and could see good reasons why it would be convenient for none of us to be party to this one. But still, we had been living in the Undergarden, and I didn’t much like our being regularly excluded. “Or are you representing us?”

“It’s… it’s complicated.”

“It is,” I acknowledged. “I don’t want to intimidate anyone, or dictate policy, but our quarters are in the Undergarden.”

“People mostly understand that,” Uran replied. “It’s just…” Hesitation. Real fear, I thought. “You are Radchaai. And you’re a soldier. And you might prefer better neighbors.” I might be in favor of reassigning housing in the Undergarden, or even shipping Ychana residents downwell whether they wanted to go or not, to get them out of the way. “I’ve told them you don’t.”

“But they have no reason to believe that.” Neither did Uran, for that matter. “I’m too busy to attend the meeting just now. I think Lieutenant Tisarwat should be invited.” She was still asleep, and would wake hungover. “But the meeting will decide for themselves. If the lieutenant is invited, tell her I said to only listen. She’s to stay quiet unless she’s explicitly asked to comment. Tell her that’s an order.”

“Yes, Radchaai.”

“And suggest to the meeting that if the Ychana join the line, they be sure to be on their very best, most patient, behavior, and wear gloves.” Few things were as disconcerting and embarrassing to Radchaai as bare hands in public.

“Oh, no, Radchaai!” Uran exclaimed. “We’re not thinking of joining the line.” I couldn’t help but notice that we, but said nothing. “Security is nervous enough. No, we’re thinking of giving out food and tea to the people waiting.” She bit her lip, just a moment. “And to the priests.” Her shoulders hunched a bit, as though she expected angry words, or a blow.

She had spent most of her life downwell, picking tea in the mountains on Athoek. She had family among those striking field workers whose example Eminence Ifian now took. Uran had been personally involved in a previous strike, though she’d been quite small at the time and probably didn’t remember it. “Do you need funds for it?” I asked, still in Delsig. Her eyes widened. She had not expected that reaction. “Let me know if you do. And remember that groups of more than two or three will likely make Security unhappy.” Even two or three might do that. “I’ll try to make time to talk with the head of Security myself today. Though I’m very busy, and it might not be for a while.”

“Yes, Radchaai.” She bowed and made as if to leave, but halted suddenly, eyes widening. An outcry behind me, a dozen voices or more exclaiming in anger and dismay. I turned.

The line, which had snaked quietly down the length of the concourse, had broken in the middle, one Security struggling with a citizen, another raising her stun stick, the space around them clear—the citizens nearest had removed to a safer distance.

“Stop!” I shouted, my voice carrying across the entire concourse, my tone guaranteed to immobilize any military in the near vicinity. Absently I noted that Five, behind me, had tensed at the sound. But Security was not military. The stun stick came down, and the citizen cried out and collapsed.

“Stop!” I shouted again, and this time both Security turned their heads to me as I strode toward them, Five behind me.

“All respect, Fleet Captain,” said the Security still holding the stun stick. The stricken citizen lay on the ground, giving out a series of gasping moans. Uran’s Raswar tutor. I had not recognized her from a distance. “You don’t have authority in this matter.”

“Station,” I said aloud, “what happened?”

It was the Security kneeling on the ground beside Uran’s tutor who answered. “Head of Security ordered us to disperse the line, Fleet Captain. This person refused to go.”

This person. Not this citizen. “Disperse the line?” I asked, making my voice as calm and even as possible without dropping into ancillary blankness. Uran’s tutor still gasped on the ground. “Why?” Silently, I said, “Station, please send Medical.”

“They’re on their way, Fleet Captain,” said Station in my ear.

At the same time, the kneeling Security said, “I just follow my orders, Fleet Captain.”

I said, “I will see the head of Security right now.”

Before either Security could reply, Head of Security Lusulun’s voice sounded behind me. “Fleet Captain!”

I turned. “Why did you order the line dispersed?” I asked, with no courteous preamble. “It looked perfectly peaceable to me, and lines generally play themselves out eventually.”

“This isn’t a good time for public unrest, Fleet Captain.” Lusulun seemed genuinely puzzled at my question, as though its answer were obvious. “It’s peaceable now, but what if the Undergarden Ychana join it?” I considered, for a moment, how I might answer that. Said nothing, and Lusulun went on, “I intended to speak to you, in fact. If something like that were to happen I might…” She lowered her voice. “I might need your assistance.”

“So,” I said, several replies coming to mind. I discarded them as impolitic. “You guessed correctly that I have been in more than one annexation. And I’ve learned more than a few lessons from it, some of them at great cost. I will share one of them with you now: most people don’t want trouble, but frightened people are liable to do very dangerous things.” That included soldiers and Station Security, of course, but I didn’t say that. “If I were to set soldiers on the concourse, everything you fear—and worse—would come to pass.” I gestured toward Uran’s tutor, whose gasping had lessened, but who still could not move. A medic knelt beside her. The two Security stared at me, at Head of Security Lusulun. “I speak from experience. Let the line be the line. Let your security be present but not threatening. Treat all the citizens here with equal courtesy and respect.” I wondered if Security had known Uran’s tutor was Ychana, just by looking at her. I couldn’t always see the differences, but no doubt most people who lived here could. I suspected Security’s reaction would have been less severe if the citizen who had refused to go had not been Ychana. But suggesting it would not have been helpful at that particular moment. “Let them all have their say,” I continued. Lusulun stared at me for five seconds, saying nothing. “Station Security is here to protect citizens. You can’t do that if you insist on seeing any of them as adversaries. I’m speaking from personal experience.”

“And if they see us as adversaries?”

“How can it possibly help to prove them right?” Silence again. “I know exactly how dangerous it sounds, but please. Please take my advice.” She sighed, and made a frustrated gesture. “Let Medical tend to this citizen, and let her go about her business. Let the rest of the line know that a mistake was made”—no need to say who had made that mistake, or what it had been—“and they can continue waiting in line.”

“But…,” began Lusulun.

“Tell me, Head of Security,” I interrupted before she could say more, “when were you going to order the priests of Amaat to disperse?”

“But…,” she said again.

“They are disrupting the ordinary operation of this station. I’d say they’re causing Station Administrator Celar a good deal more trouble than these citizens here.” I gestured toward the ragged remnants of the line surrounding us.

“I don’t know, Fleet Captain.” But the mention of Administrator Celar had had its effect.

“Trust me. I have done this sort of thing before, in situations a good deal more potentially explosive than this one.” And my officers would never have given the orders that Head of Security Lusulun had today, not unless they had been prepared to kill a large number of people. Which not infrequently they had been.

“If things go wrong, will you help?” asked Lusulun.

“I will not order my soldiers to fire on citizens.”

“That wasn’t what I asked.” Indignant.

“You may not think so,” I replied, “you may not have intended to ask that. But that would be the result. And I won’t do it.”

She stood a moment, doubtful. Then something decided her—her own thoughts, my mention of the bulky and beautiful Administrator Celar, a word, perhaps, from Station. She sighed. “I’m trusting you.”

“Thank you,” I said.

“Fleet Captain.” Station’s voice in my ear. “There’s a message for you from downwell. A Citizen Queter has requested that you be a witness to her interrogation. I ordinarily wouldn’t trouble you right now, but if you mean to attend, you’ll have to leave in the next hour.”

Queter. Uran’s older sister. Raughd Denche had blackmailed her into trying to kill me. Or thought she had. Instead Queter had tried to kill Raughd herself. “Please tell the district magistrate that I’ll be there as soon as I can.” I wouldn’t have to say anything more. Kalr Five, who had been standing near me the entire time, would arrange the details for me.


In the tea shop, Governor Giarod and Translator Zeiat sat at a table laden with food—bowls of noodles and of sliced fruits, platters of fish. An attendant stood watching, appalled, as Governor Giarod said, “But, Translator, it’s not for drinking. It’s a condiment. Here.” She pushed the noodles closer to the translator. “Fish sauce is very good on this.”

“But it’s a liquid,” replied Translator Zeiat, reasonably enough, “and it tastes good.” The tea shop attendant turned and walked hastily away. The idea of drinking a bowlful of oily, salty fish sauce was too much for her, apparently.

“Governor,” I interrupted, before the conversation could go further. “Translator. I find I have urgent business downwell that can’t be delayed or avoided.”

“On the planet?” asked Translator Zeiat. “I’ve never been on a planet before. Can I come with you?”

The fish sauce must have been as much as Governor Giarod could take. “Yes. Yes, by all means, visit the planet with the fleet captain.” She hadn’t even asked what my business was. I wondered if her eagerness was for being rid of Translator Zeiat, or being rid of me.