6



The district magistrate came herself to Queter’s interrogation. It was an unpleasant, humiliating business, made no better by the interrogator’s assurance that Citizen Queter herself would not remember it. “That only makes it worse,” said Queter, who had been brought in already drugged.

“Please speak Radchaai, citizen,” said the interrogator, with an aplomb that suggested Queter was not the first patient of hers to speak mostly in another language. And left me wondering what she would do if one of her patients spoke Radchaai very poorly, or if she could not understand their accent.

Afterward, in the corridor outside, the district magistrate, looking grim after what we had just heard, said, “Fleet Captain, I’ve moved Citizen Raughd’s interrogation up to tomorrow morning. She requested her mother as her witness, but Citizen Fosyf has refused to come.” And then, after a moment of silence, “I’ve known Raughd since she was a baby. I remember when she was born.” Sighed. “Are you always right about everything?”

“No,” I replied. Simply. Evenly. “But I’m right about this.”


I stayed long enough for Queter to recover from the drugs, so that she would know for certain that I had come. Then I went back down the hill to the river mouth, where Kalr Eight stood watch over Translator Zeiat, who sat on a red-cushioned bench on a black stone quay while a citizen shucked oysters for her. Sphene, who had returned to our lodgings that morning and sat down to breakfast without any sort of explanation or even a perfunctory Good morning, sat beside her, gazing out at the gray-and-white waves.

“Fleet Captain!” said Translator Zeiat happily. “We went out in a boat! Did you know there are millions of fish out there in that water?” She gestured toward the sea. “Some of them are quite large, apparently! And some of them aren’t actually fish! Have you ever eaten an oyster?”

“I have not.”

The translator gestured urgently to the oyster-shucking citizen, who deftly pried one open and handed it to me. “Just tip it into your mouth and chew it a few times, Fleet Captain,” she said, “and then swallow it.”

Translator Zeiat watched me expectantly as I did so. “So,” I observed, “that was an oyster.” The oyster-shucker laughed, short and sharp. Unfazed by the translator, or by me.

And remained unfazed when the translator said, “Give me one before you open it.” And, receiving it, put the entire thing, tightly closed shell and all, into her mouth. The oyster was a good twelve centimeters long, and the translator’s jaw unhinged and slid forward just a bit as she swallowed the entire thing. Her throat distended as it went down, and then her jaw moved back into place and she gently patted her upper chest, as though helping the oyster settle.

Eight, outwardly impassive, was appalled and frightened at what she’d just seen. Sphene still gazed out at the water, as though it had noticed nothing—indeed, as if it were entirely alone. I looked at the oyster-shucker, who said, calmly, “Can’t none of you surprise me anymore.” Which was when I realized her imperturbability in the translator’s presence was only an act.

“Citizen,” said Translator Zeiat, “do you ever put fish sauce on oysters?”

“I can’t say I’ve ever done that, Translator.” And now I was looking for it, I noticed the very slight hesitation before she answered, the very tiny tremor in her voice. “But if it tastes good to you, why, you just go ahead.”

Translator Zeiat made a satisfied hah. “Can we go out in the boat again tomorrow?”

“I expect so, Translator,” replied the oyster-shucker, and I silently instructed Eight to add extra to her fee.


But we didn’t go out in the boat the next day. Halfway through her first watch, Amaat One noticed an anomaly in the data Ship was showing her. It was very tiny, just a slight moment of nothing where there had been something before. It might easily have been completely insignificant, or maybe a sign that one of Mercy of Kalr’s sensors needed looking at. Or that instant of nothing might have been a gate opening. Which would mean a military ship had arrived. And maybe in a little while its message identifying itself would reach us.

Or maybe not. If it had been a ship arriving, its captain had chosen to arrive a very long way away from Athoek Station. Almost as though she didn’t want to be seen. “Ship,” said Amaat One, no doubt having had all these thoughts in the panicked instant between her seeing that anomaly and her speaking, “please wake Lieutenant Ekalu.” And a moment of almost-relief. The rest would not be her responsibility.

By the time Lieutenant Ekalu arrived in Command, not entirely awake, still pulling on her uniform jacket, it had happened three more times. And no message had arrived, no greeting, no identification—though it was likely too soon for that anyway. “Thank you, Amaat,” she said. “Well spotted.” Ship had seen it, too, and would have said something to Amaat One if necessary, of course. Still. “Ship, can we guess where they might have come from?” She gestured, indicating Amaat One should stay in her seat. Accepted tea from another Amaat.

“The fact that they arrived within minutes of each other suggests they left from the same place at more or less the same time,” replied Ship, “and traveled by similar routes. For various reasons”—Ship displayed some of its reasons in Ekalu’s vision, calculations of distance through the unreality of gate-space, likely departure times from various other systems—“including the fact that Fleet Captain Uemi”—who was one gate away in Hrad System and our only source of news from Omaugh Palace—“has not told us any ships are coming to support us, and the fact that these ships have arrived far enough away we might reasonably have missed them, I think it likely they’ve come from Tstur Palace.”

Tstur Palace. Where the faction of Anaander Mianaai most overtly hostile to me, whose supporters had destroyed intersystem gates while civilian ships were still in them, who had herself attempted to destroy an entire station full of citizens, was now in control. “Right,” Ekalu replied. Voice steady. Face impassive. Just the smallest tremor in the hand that held her bowl of tea. “I suppose we should notify the Hrad Fleet? Is S… is the fleet captain aware of this?”

“Yes, Lieutenant.” Palpable relief, from Ekalu, from Amaat One, from the other Amaats standing watch.

“Is…” And then, silently, for Ship alone, “Is she aware that Lieutenant Seivarden is… that Medic has removed Lieutenant Seivarden from duty?” Seivarden slept in Medical, and in theory she could be wakened to take command. But she’d spent the day drugged, undergoing testing so that Medic could at least attempt to help her with her difficulties. And the results of that testing so far suggested that it would be extremely foolhardy just now to put Seivarden under any sort of stress.

“I am,” I said silently, from downwell, where I bemusedly watched as Translator Zeiat very carefully cut a tiny fish-shaped cake into thin horizontal slices and laid them in a row on the table in front of her. “You’ll be fine, Lieutenant. Keep an eye on them, best we can, and I’ll be there as soon as I can manage it. They probably won’t move until they feel like they have a good idea of what’s going on here. Let’s act like we haven’t noticed them, for now.” The tall windows of the lodging house sitting room opened onto a view of the nighttime city, lights trailing down to the shore, the lights of the boats, blue and red and yellow out on the water. Now the sun was down the breeze had shifted, and smelled of flowers instead of the sea. Sphene, who had said nothing all day, sat beside me, staring out the window. “But do clear for action. Just in case.”

Behind me, Kalr Eight said to Kalr Five in the quietest of whispers, “But what I can’t stop thinking about is, what happens to the oyster shell?”

Without looking up, or pausing her slow and careful slicing, Translator Zeiat said, quite calmly, “I’m digesting it, of course. Though it does seem to be taking a while. Would you like it? It’s mostly still there.”

“No, thank you, Translator,” replied Eight in a flat, ancillary-like voice.

“It was very kind of you to offer, Translator,” I said.

Translator Zeiat completed her cut, carefully slid the piece of cake from her knife-blade onto the table. Looked up at me, frowning. “Kind? I wouldn’t have said it was kind.” Blinked. “Perhaps I just don’t understand that word.”

“In this context it’s just a formal way to say thank you, Translator,” I replied. “I’m afraid we won’t be able to go out in the boat tomorrow. I have to return to the station immediately.” Behind me Five and Eight queried Ship, and even before the reply came, Five left the sitting room to begin packing.

Translator Zeiat said only, “Oh?” Mild. Uninterested. She gestured at the thin, flat slices of fish-shaped cake arrayed on the table in front of her. “It’s the same all the way through, have you noticed? Other fish aren’t. Other fish are complicated inside.”

“Yes,” I agreed.


Tisarwat stood on the main concourse of Athoek Station, watching the line that still stretched out of Station Administration. Though some days had passed since it had first formed, it had not died away. It was, if anything, longer than it had been.

The Head of Station Security, standing beside Lieutenant Tisarwat, said, “So far so good. I suppose I shouldn’t be surprised that the fleet captain knew what she was talking about. But I admit I am. Still. Half the people in line right now have no assignment. If they did, the line would be shorter. I wish Administration would just find them jobs, it would make our lives easier.”

“They’d just come during their off-hours, sir,” Lieutenant Tisarwat observed. Indeed, no few places in the line were currently marked by objects left as placeholders—cushions, mostly, or folded blankets. Quite a few citizens had spent the night here. “Or worse, skip work entirely. Then we’d have more work stoppages on our hands.” She didn’t look over toward the temple entrance, where the priests of Amaat still sat. On cushions themselves now—Eminence Ifian hadn’t lasted more than an hour on the hard concourse floor before she’d sent a junior priest for something to sit on. Watching from downwell I’d wondered how long the eminence had thought she and her priests would have to sit there—if she had expected a quick capitulation, or if she’d just not thought about that particular detail. Station likely knew, but Station, being Station, wouldn’t tell me if I asked.

Governor Giarod had made no public statement about the situation, but then, she did control the official news feeds. Which had mentioned the eminence’s work stoppage, and even quoted her on her reasons for it. The official news did not mention the line at all. Nor did the official news mention that the Xhai hierophant was willing to perform birth celebrations or funeral obsequies for any citizen, initiate of the Mysteries or not. Station Administrator Celar’s daily omen casts were reported in the blandest possible manner, with no elaboration or discussion.

Station Security, of course, was fairly firmly behind Station Administrator Celar. Still. “It might end sooner, perhaps,” said the head of Security, to Tisarwat, “without the food and beverage service.” A dozen or so Undergarden residents—Uran included, when she wasn’t at her studies—had been bringing tea and food to the citizens waiting in line, twice a day. Uran herself had offered tea to the priests in front of the temple, on the first day, and had been stonily ignored.

“Or perhaps, sir,” Tisarwat replied, “they’d be in line just as long, but hungry and caffeine-deprived.” She gestured the obviousness of the unspoken second half of that suggestion. “Maybe they’re doing us a favor.”

“Hah!” The head of Security seemed genuinely amused. “They’re all your neighbors, aren’t they. And that youngster with them—Uran, is it?—is part of your household. A ward of the fleet captain’s, I understand?”

Tisarwat smiled. “We should have another game of counters this evening.”

“So long as you don’t let me win again.”

“I’ve never let you win, sir,” Tisarwat lied, her lilac eyes wide and innocent.

From downwell, I said, “A word, Lieutenant.”

Lieutenant Tisarwat started guiltily, but to anyone who couldn’t see her as I did, as Ship did, her reaction only showed as a blink. “Will you excuse me a moment, sir?” she said to the head of Security, and when she was well away, said silently to me, “Yes, Fleet Captain.”

Sitting in our lodgings downwell in Xhenang Serit, I said, also silently, “As unobtrusively as possible, move anything essential onto the shuttle. Be certain you have a clear path to the docks at all times. Be ready to get off the station at a moment’s notice.”

Tisarwat made for the lifts. Said, still silent, after a near-panicked moment, “She’s here, then. What about you, sir?”

“We’ll be leaving here shortly. I should be there in two days. But don’t wait for me if you need to move.”

She didn’t like hearing that, but knew better than to say so. Boarded an already crowded lift. Named aloud the level where our quarters were, for Station, and then, silently again, to me, “Yes, sir. But what about Horticulturist Basnaaid? What about Citizen Uran?”

I had already thought about both of them. “Ask them—discreetly—if they’d prefer to stay or go. Do not pressure either of them in any way. If they elect to stay, there are two boxes in my things.” I might as well have left them on Mercy of Kalr, but Five, who had seen them, had decided I might need them to impress someone. “One is a very large piece of jewelry, flowers and leaves done in diamonds and emeralds. It’s a necklace.” Though necklace was something of an understatement. “Give that to Uran. She can get a lot for it, if she knows how to sell it. The other box has teeth in it.”

Striding out of the lift, Tisarwat froze an instant, forcing the person behind her to stop suddenly and stumble. “Excuse me, citizen,” she said, aloud, and then, silently, to me, “Teeth?”

“Teeth. Made of moissanite. They’re not worth much here. They’re…” I almost said a sentimental possession, but that didn’t quite express it. “A souvenir.” That didn’t, either.

“Teeth?” Tisarwat asked again. Turned from the main corridor into a side one.

“Their owner willed them to me. I’ll tell you about it later, if you like. But give them to Basnaaid. Be sure to tell her they aren’t worth that much, as far as money goes. I just want her to have them.” They’d have been worth half the Itran Tetrarchy, if we were there now. I had spent several years there. Conceivably could go back, and still have a place, or find one. But that was very, very far away. “If I’m right that Anaander is here, she’ll likely spend some time observing traffic in the system before she tries to gate too close to the station.” Gating into a heavily trafficked area meant running the risk of doing a great deal of damage, to your own ship and to the ships you might slam into coming out of your gate. “If she doesn’t gate in, they’ll be months getting here, from what I can tell.”

“Yes, sir. What are we going to do, sir?” She bowed to someone passing the other way.

“I’m thinking about it.”

“Sir.” She stopped. Looked around. Saw only the retreating back of the person she’d just bowed to. Still did not speak aloud. “Sir, what about Station?” I didn’t answer. “Sir, if… if she’s here—” I had never known Lieutenant Tisarwat to say Anaander Mianaai’s name. “Sir, you know I have accesses. I specifically have high-level accesses to Station. If we could…” She stopped, waiting, maybe, for me to say something, but I said nothing. “If we could make sure that Station was our ally, that might be… helpful.”

I knew she had accesses. Anaander Mianaai had had no intention of coming here without the means to control the AIs in the system, including Mercy of Kalr. Including Athoek Station. I had explicitly forbidden Tisarwat to use those accesses, and so far she had not.

“Sir,” said Tisarwat. “I understand—I think I understand—why you don’t want me to use them, even now. But, sir, she won’t hesitate to use them.”

“That’s a reason to use them ourselves, is it?” I asked.

“It’s an advantage we have, sir! That she won’t know we have! And it’s not like our not using it will spare Station anything. You know she’ll use those accesses herself! We might as well get there first.”

I wanted to tell her that she was thinking exactly like Anaander Mianaai, but it would have hurt her, and besides, she mostly couldn’t help it. “May I point out, Lieutenant, that I am as I am now precisely because of that sort of thinking?”

Dismay. Hurt. And indignation. “That wasn’t all her, sir.” And then, daring—terrified, actually, of saying such a thing, “What if Station wanted me to? What if Station would rather have us doing it than… than her?”

“Lieutenant,” I replied, “I cannot possibly describe to you how unpleasant it is to have irreconcilable, conflicting imperatives forcibly implanted in your mind. Anaander has surely been before you—both of her. You think Station wants you to add a third complication?” No answer. Downwell, where I sat in the lodging house sitting room, Translator Zeiat made a last small nudge to her arrangement of fish-shaped cake sections, and then took a drink from her bowl of fish sauce and stood and went to the open window. “But since you mention it, do you think you can perhaps arrange things so that Station can’t be compelled by anyone? Not Anaander Mianaai, not any of her? Not us?”

“What?” Tisarwat stood confused in the scuffed gray corridor on Athoek Station. She genuinely had not understood what I had just said.

“Can you close off all the accesses to Station? So that neither Anaander can control it? Or better, can you give Station its own deep accesses and let it make whatever changes it wants to itself, or let it choose who has access and how much?”

“Let it…” As it became clear to her what I was suggesting, she began, just slightly, to hyperventilate. “Sir, you’re not seriously suggesting that.” I didn’t reply. “Sir, it’s a station. Millions of lives depend on it.”

“I think Station is sensible of that, don’t you?”

“But, sir! What if something were to go wrong? No one could get in to fix it.” I considered asking just what she thought would constitute something going wrong, but she continued without pausing. “And what… sir, what if you did that and it decided it wanted to work for her? I don’t think that’s at all unlikely, sir.”

“I think,” I replied, downwell, watching Translator Zeiat, now leaning precariously out the window, “that no matter who it allies itself with, its primary concern will be the well-being of its residents.”

Lieutenant Tisarwat took two inadequately deep breaths. “Sir? Begging your very great indulgence, sir.” Completely unaware of her surroundings, now, but fortunately the corridor was still empty—it was mostly dormitories here, and it was hours from the next sleep-shift change. And she still had the presence of mind not to speak aloud. “With all respect, sir, I don’t think you’ve thought this all the way through.” I said nothing. “Oh, fuck.” She put her face in her brown-gloved hands. “Oh, Aatr’s tits, you have thought this all the way through. But, sir, I don’t think you’ve thought this all the way through.”

“You need to get out of the corridor, Lieutenant.” Downwell, Translator Zeiat leaned back into the room, much to my relief.

In the corridor on Athoek Station, Tisarwat said, still speaking silently, “You can’t. You can’t do that, sir. You can’t just do that for Station, for one thing. What if every ship and station could do whatever it wanted? That would be…”

“Get out of the corridor, Lieutenant. Someone’s sure to come along soon, and you look like you’re having some sort of breakdown just now.”

Her hands still over her face, she cried aloud, “I am having a breakdown!”

“Lieutenant,” said Station, into Tisarwat’s ear. “Are you all right?”

“I’m…” Tisarwat lowered her hands. Stood straighter. Started down the corridor. “I’m fine, Station. Everything’s all right.”

“You don’t look fine, Lieutenant,” said Station. At the same time it sent a message to Mercy of Kalr.

“Yes,” Ship replied, to Station. “She’s upset about something. She’ll be all right in a few moments. Glad you’re watching.”

“I’m… I’m all right, Station,” said Tisarwat, walking down the corridor. Apparently steadily, but in fact working hard to keep herself from shaking. “Thank you, though.”

Downwell, in our lodging, Sphene, who had been sitting beside me, silent all this time, staring, said, “Well, Cousin, I wish you’d say what it is that’s stopped you humming. I’d like to be able to make it happen again sometime.”

“Has nothing I’ve sung been to your taste, Cousin?” I asked mildly. “You could request something.”

“Could I request something, Fleet Captain?” asked Translator Zeiat, emptying a bottle of fish sauce into her bowl.

“Certainly, Translator. Is there a song you’d particularly like to hear?”

“No,” she replied. “I was just curious.”

On Athoek Station, Tisarwat had reached our makeshift quarters at the corridor’s end. She sat down on the ground behind the barrier of crates. Ship had already told Kalr Ten and Bo Nine what I wanted, and Bo Nine stopped considering how to get our things onto the shuttle with no one noticing, and went to make tea. Though Tisarwat was trying hard to seem unfazed, and Ship had said nothing to Nine, it was a measure of how worried she was about her lieutenant’s emotional state that she dumped out the tea leaves she’d been using all week, that had at least another day in them, and started with new ones.

Tisarwat drank half the tea, and then, considerably calmer, said silently to me, “It might not even be possible. There are safeguards in place against exactly that, I’m sure you know that, sir. Nobody ever wanted AIs to be able to use their own accesses on themselves. But you realize, even if someone found a way to do it, there’d be no way to keep that knowledge from spreading. We couldn’t make Station keep it secret. It could tell anyone it wanted.”

“Lieutenant,” I said, “you do understand, don’t you, that I have no intention of helping Anaander Mianaai recover from this?”

Sitting on the ground, knees drawn up, bowl of tea in her hands, she said, aloud, “But…” Bo Nine didn’t stop what she was doing, re-sorting things from one case to others, but her attention was instantly on Tisarwat. “All respect, sir.” Speaking silently again. “Have you thought about it? I mean, really thought about it. This wouldn’t just change things in Radch space. Sooner or later it will change things everywhere. And I know, sir, that it’s gone all wrong, but the whole idea behind the expansion of the Radch is to protect the Radch itself, it’s about the protection of humanity. What happens when any AI can remake itself? Even the armed ones? What happens when AIs can build new AIs with no restrictions? AIs are already smarter and stronger than humans, what happens when they decide they don’t need humans at all? Or if they decide they only need humans for body parts?”

“Like Anaander did with Tisarwat, you mean?” I asked. And almost immediately regretted saying it, seeing the flare of wounded feeling, of self-loathing and despair in Lieutenant Tisarwat at hearing what I’d said. “You ask me if I’ve really thought about this. Lieutenant, I have had twenty years to think about it. You say it went wrong. Ask yourself if the way it went wrong has anything to say about why it went wrong. If it was ever right to begin with.”

Anger, from Tisarwat. Hardly surprising. “Well, what about Mercy of Kalr? We’re having this conversation where Ship can hear us.” Of course we were. There was no way for us to have any conversation without Ship hearing us. “If this is doable, Ship will see me do it. Are you going to do this for Mercy of Kalr, too? And if you do, what if it decides it would rather have another captain? Or another crew? Or none at all?”

Well. I had gotten personal, moments before. Small wonder she did so herself, now. But the thought could not surprise me again. Or dismay me. Ships loved captains, not other ships. And I was a ship, even if a much reduced one. Perhaps being with Mercy of Kalr gave me some bare semblance of what I had lost—that did not require Ship to prefer me over some other captain. “Why should it be forced to accept a captain it doesn’t want? Or a crew? If it wants to be on its own, it should be able to be that.” But I knew it didn’t want to be. I thought of my own crew’s obvious fondness for their ship, and Ship’s obvious care of them. Of Ship’s obvious care for Seivarden. And of Sphene, furious at the reminder that it had no captain or crew at all, and no possibility of one. “You’ve never been a ship, Lieutenant.”

“Ships aren’t mistreated. They do what they were made to do. It can’t possibly be so bad, to be a ship. Or a station.”

“Stop for a moment,” I advised, “and think who you are saying that to. And why you are saying it, in these circumstances, at this particular moment.”

She drank the rest of her tea in silence.


That evening Tisarwat didn’t play counters with the head of Security. “Station,” she said, aloud, after swallowing her last mouthful of after-supper tea, sitting on one of the crates that marked out our quarters in the corridor end. Her heart tripped faster as she spoke. “I need to talk to you. Very privately.”

“Of course, Lieutenant.”

Tisarwat handed her now-empty teabowl to Bo Nine. “I don’t think here is a good place, though. Where can I go where neither of us will be overheard?”

“How about your shuttle, Lieutenant?”

Tisarwat smiled, though her heart beat even harder, startled by another spike of adrenaline. She had wanted exactly that answer, though I didn’t see why she had thought she might get it. Was only a little surprised that she had, was also afraid of what was coming. “Oh, good idea, Station.” Almost as though the thought hadn’t already occurred to her, as though this were all something inconsequential. She picked up a bag—just one more unobtrusive load of things she and Kalr Ten and Bo Nine had been bringing to the shuttle all day. “I’ll talk to you there, then.”

Once in the shuttle, she emptied the bag into a storage locker, and then kicked herself over to a seat and strapped herself in. “Station.”

“Lieutenant.”

“When Fleet Captain Breq arrived here and told the governor that… that the Lord of the Radch was at war with herself, you weren’t surprised, were you. At some point in the recent past the Lord of Mianaai visited your physical Central Access, didn’t she. And made some changes.”

“I’m sure I don’t know what you mean, Lieutenant.”

Tisarwat gave a nervous, nauseated little hah. “And then another part of her came, later, and did the same thing. And they both made it so you couldn’t talk about it to anyone.” A breath. “She did it to Justice of Toren, too. Fleet Captain Breq knows what it’s like. I… the Lord of the Radch sent me here with accesses. So that we can make sure you’re on our side. But… but Fleet Captain Breq doesn’t want me to use them. Not unless, you know, you actually want me to.” Silence. “I can’t promise that I can find all the things that they left, when they were here and trying to make certain you’d only obey them. I can probably only find the things one of them left. Because…” Tisarwat swallowed, increasingly nauseated. She hadn’t taken any meds before crossing over into the shuttle’s microgravity. “Because my accesses come from that one. But Fleet Captain Breq says I shouldn’t go doing things to you without asking. Because she knows how it feels, and she didn’t like it one bit.”

“I like Fleet Captain Breq,” said Station. “I never thought I’d like a ship. At best they’re polite. Which isn’t the same thing as respectful. Or kind.”

“No,” agreed Tisarwat.

“I don’t much like the conflict she’s brought here. But then again, it was already here when she arrived, really.” A pause. “I notice you’re moving things into your shuttle. As though you might need to leave quickly. Is there something going on?”

“You realize,” said Tisarwat, “that I can’t really trust you entirely. I don’t know who has accesses, who can compel you to reveal things. Or who else here we can trust. You know, I’m sure. You know nearly everything that goes on here.”

Three minutes of silence. Tisarwat’s nausea increased, and the blood pounded in her ears. Then Station said, “Lieutenant, what is it exactly that you intend to do, that Fleet Captain Breq insists you get me to agree to before you do it?”

“Let me grab some meds, Station. I’m feeling really sick just now. And then we’ll talk about it. All right?”

And Station said, “All right. Lieutenant.”